PREFACE


The editing of this Dorset volume was originally undertaken by the
Rev. Thomas Perkins, the scholarly Rector of Turnworth. But he, having
formulated its plan and written four papers therefor, besides gathering
material for most of the other chapters, was laid aside by a very
painful illness, which culminated in his unexpected death. This is
a great loss to his many friends, to the present volume, and to the
county of Dorset as a whole; for Mr. Perkins knew the county as few men
know it, his literary ability was of no mean order, and his kindness to
all with whom he was brought in contact was proverbial.

After the death of Mr. Perkins, the editing of the work was entrusted
to the Rev. Herbert Pentin, Vicar of Milton Abbey, whose knowledge of
the county and literary experience as Editor of the Dorset Natural
History and Antiquarian Field Club enabled him to gather up the threads
where his friend Mr. Perkins had been compelled to lay them down, and
to complete the work and see it safely through the press. As General
Editor of the series, I desire to express my most grateful thanks to
him for his kind and gracious services in perfecting a work which had
unfortunately been left incomplete; and all lovers of Old Dorset and
readers of this book will greatly appreciate his good offices.

Few counties can rival Dorset either in natural beauty or historic
interest, and it deserves an honoured place among the memorials of
the counties of England. In preparing the work the Editors have
endeavoured to make the volume comprehensive, although it is of
course impossible in a single volume to exhaust all the rich store of
historical treasures which the county affords. After a general sketch
of the history of Dorset by the late Editor, the traces of the earliest
races which inhabited this county are discussed by Mr. Prideaux, who
tells of the ancient barrows in Dorset, and the details of the Roman
occupation are shown by Captain Acland. Dorset is rich in churches,
and no one was more capable to describe their chief features than Mr.
Perkins. His chapter is followed by others of more detail, dealing
with the three great minsters still standing—Sherborne, Milton, and
Wimborne, the monastic house at Ford, and the memorial brasses of
Dorset. A series of chapters on some of the chief towns and “islands”
of the county follows, supplemented by a description of two well-known
manor-houses. The literary associations of the county and some of its
witchcraft-superstitions form the subjects of the concluding chapters.
The names of the able writers who have kindly contributed to this
volume will commend themselves to our readers. The Lord Bishop of
Durham, the Rev. R. Grosvenor Bartelot, Mr. Sidney Heath, Mr. Wildman,
Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Gill, Mrs. King Warry, and our other contributors,
are among the chief authorities upon the subjects of which they treat,
and our thanks are due to them for their services; and also to Mr.
William Pye for the beautiful coloured frontispiece, to Mr. Heath for
his charming drawings, and to those who have supplied photographs for
reproduction. We hope that this volume will find a welcome in the
library of every Dorset book-lover, and meet with the approbation of
all who revere the traditions and historical associations of the county.

  P. H. DITCHFIELD,
  _General Editor_.



