THE ROMAN OCCUPATION

BY CAPTAIN J. E. ACLAND

_Curator, Dorset County Museum_


Although we are dealing with historic and not prehistoric times in
describing the occupation of the County of Dorset by the Romans, it is
to the work of the spade and not of the pen that we must turn for the
memorials of that most interesting and important period, which lasted
nearly four hundred years; when the all-powerful, masterful race, the
conquerors of the world, held sway, enforced obedience to their laws,
and inaugurated that system of colonisation which was perhaps the best
the world has ever seen—a system designed and developed according
to exact regulations, which savoured more of military discipline
than of that civil liberty which we associate with the profession of
agriculture.

The Roman occupation was indeed an admirable combination of military
and civil rule; and the memorials fall naturally into two distinct
classes, corresponding with two distinct periods. There is, first, the
period of conquest, embracing the years during which the Roman Legions
drove back the native levies, and captured their strongholds; not in
one summer campaign we may well believe, but year after year, with
irresistible force, until the subjugated tribes laid down their arms
and yielded the hostages demanded by the conquerors. Then followed the
period of peace, of civilisation, and of colonising; of improving the
roads, and marking out of farms; the days of trade and commerce, and
of building houses, temples, and places for public amusement.

Now both aspects of the occupation are to be seen as clearly at this
day as if they were described in the pages of a book; and yet what is
the fact? Scarcely a sentence can be found of written history which
deals with it. General Pitt-Rivers, who, living in Dorset, devoted
many years of his life to antiquarian research, asserts that having
read with attention all the writings that were accessible upon that
obscure period of history, some by scholars of great ability, nothing
definite can be found to relate to the Roman Conquest. It is, however,
generally assumed that it fell to the lot of Vespasian, in command of
the world-famous “Legio Secunda,” to commence, if not to complete, the
subjugation of the Durotriges, the people who are believed to have
inhabited the southern portion of the county. The only reference to
Vespasian’s campaign by contemporary historians is made by Suetonius.
He says that Vespasian crossed to Britain, fought with the enemy some
thirty times, and reduced to submission two most warlike tribes and
twenty fortified camps, and the island (Isle of Wight) adjacent to
the coast. In this statement, which is all too brief to satisfy our
curiosity, may lie the main facts of the passing of Dorset into Roman
power. The work begun by Vespasian may, indeed, have been completed by
others—by Paulinus Suetonius, the Governor of Britain about the year
60, and by Agricola; and where so much is left to conjecture, it is
at least worth while to give once more the theory propounded by the
well-known antiquary, the late Mr. Charles Warne, F.S.A. In a paper
read before the Society of Antiquaries in June, 1867, he suggests that
as the south-eastern parts of Britain had been previously visited by
Roman armies, Vespasian directed his course further to the west, and
either made the Isle of Wight the base of his operations or anchored
his ships in the harbours of Swanage or Poole. Close by is the
commencement of the long range of hills, The Ridgeway, which, with few
interruptions, follows the coast line, and still shews by the number of
the burial-mounds the district inhabited by the British.

Mr. Warne proceeds to enumerate the various camps along this route,
all at convenient distances from one another, some of which shew by
their construction that they were Roman camps, and others British
camps, captured by the conquering legions, as narrated by Suetonius.
If Vespasian had pursued this plan of campaign, it would have had
the additional advantage of enabling him to keep in touch with his
transports. As one hill fortress after another was captured in the
march westward along the Ridgeway heights, so the fleet might have
changed its anchorage from Swanage Bay to Lulworth, from Lulworth to
the shelter of Weymouth and Portland, and finally to the neighbourhood
of Charmouth or Lyme Regis.

There is this also to be said in favour of Mr. Warne’s conjecture.
An attacking force must find out and capture the strongholds of the
defenders, which would naturally be made more strongly, and therefore
last longer than the camps of the invaders. And this is what we see in
the suggested line of the Roman advance. First, on the east, Flowers,
or Florus Bury Camp, and Bindun, then Mai-dun (Maiden Castle), after
that Eggardun, and finally, at the western limit of the county, Conig’s
Castle and Pylsdun. All these are (as far as can be seen now) British
camps of refuge; all of them must have been captured before the Roman
generals could feel secure in their own isolated position on a foreign
shore. That they were one and all occupied by the conquerors is also
most probable, and would account for the discovery of Roman relics
within their areas. No Roman camps can be seen at all approaching in
strength or size these magnificent hill fortresses. It is, of course,
well known that the armies of Rome never halted for a night without
forming an entrenchment of sufficient size to include not only the
fighting men, but the baggage train, and though traces of these still
remain on the hills of Dorset, the majority have long ago disappeared.

Perhaps the most interesting example of the military occupation of
the two races is to be seen at Hod Hill, near Blandford, where a
well-defined Roman Camp is constructed within the area of a previously
occupied British fortress, and here have been found spear heads, arrow
heads, spurs and portions of harness, rings and fibulæ, and fragments
of pottery, all indicating the Roman occupation; iron was found more
generally than bronze, and the coins are those of the earlier emperors,
including Claudius, in whose reign Vespasian made his conquests.
Badbury, four miles north-west of Wimborne, Woodbury, near Bere Regis,
and Hambledon, five miles north of Blandford, may be referred to as
memorials of the time of the Roman occupation, though not of Roman
construction.

Poundbury Camp, with its Saxon appellation, deserves special mention,
for, being situated on the outskirts of Dorchester, it has been studied
more frequently perhaps than any other earthwork in the county. It
has the form of an irregular square, with a single vallum, except on
the more exposed west side, where it is doubled, and traces have been
discovered of other ramparts now obliterated. On the north the camp
overhangs the river and valley, once probably a lake or morass, and
here the defences are slight. The area within the vallum is about
330 yards from east to west, and 180 yards from north to south.
Some authorities affirm that it was raised by the Danes about A.D.
1002, when they attacked Dorchester. Stukeley regards it as one of
Vespasian’s camps when engaged in his conquest of the Durotriges, while
other antiquarians claim for it a British origin, prior to the Roman
invasion. Mr. Warne, whose opinions are always worthy of most careful
consideration, “holds it to be a safer speculation to regard it as a
Roman earthwork,” and, no doubt, in form and general outline and size
it is very similar to other Roman camps, and altogether different to
the magnificent British fortress Maiden Castle, not two miles away.
Many Roman relics have been found, including coins ranging from the
times of Claudius to Constantine, and a tumulus is still to be seen
within the vallum, which alone would be an argument against its Celtic
origin.

Poundbury is insignificant indeed when compared with Mai-dun, and it
is impossible by mere description to convey an adequate impression
of this great earth fortress, singled out by many as the finest work
of its kind. It certainly surpasses all others in the land of the
Durotriges, and probably nowhere in the world can entrenchments be
seen of such stupendous strength. This camp, which is said to occupy
120 acres, is in form an irregular oval, embracing the whole of the
hill on which it stands; its length is nearly 800 yards, and width
275 yards. On the north, facing the plain, there are three lines of
ramparts, with intervening ditches, the slopes being exceedingly steep,
and measuring over 60 feet from apex to base. On the south the number
of ramparts is increased, but they are not so grand, and, indeed, as
Mr. Warne remarks, they appear to have been left in an unfinished
condition. At the east and west ends are the two principal entrances,
and here the ingenuity of the designer is manifested in a surprising
manner. At one end five or six ramparts, at the other as many as seven
or eight are built, so as to cover or overlap one another; vallum and
fossa, arranged with consummate skill, to complete the intricacies of
entrance, and to compel an enemy to undertake a task of the utmost
difficulty and danger.

In later times this camp was, no doubt, occupied by Roman troops as
summer quarters, its healthy position rendering it very suitable
for the purpose. Perhaps, still later, it became the residence of
some Roman magnate, who selected that fine eminence for his country
villa; at any rate, there should be no difficulty in accounting for
the discovery of Roman coins and implements, or even of villas, on
the sites of the camps and castles of the British. Many a hard fought
battle must have raged around their earthen walls.

    Ever and anon, with host to host,
    Shocks, and the splintering spear, the hard mail hewn,
    Shield breakings, and the clash of brands, the crash
    Of battle axes on shattered helms.

Many a shout of victory must have been heard as the conquering legions
forced their way over the ramparts and planted their eagles on the
summit of the captured fortress. And once captured they must have
been retained, at first perhaps by a fairly large garrison sufficient
to prevent re-capture, then as the tide of battle ebbed from the
neighbourhood the numbers might have been reduced; but the sites,
always in some commanding position, would have been long utilised as
points of observation and centres of control over the conquered tribes.

No revolt is recorded as taking place in the west of Britain such as
that led by Queen Boadicea in the east, in the year 61; so in looking
back to the Roman occupation, it is reasonable to suppose that before
the end of the first century it was reduced to the condition of a Roman
province. Trade would soon commence with this, the latest, addition to
the Empire, and the soldiers, no longer necessary except as garrisons
and guardians of the peace, would be employed in improving the means
of communication. The warlike Briton (in these parts at any rate) was
transformed into a peaceful husbandman, who sowed and reaped, and paid
his taxes, grumbling perhaps, but on the whole contented with his lot.

Roads, or trackways, of some kind there certainly were in use by the
British, linking tribe to tribe, or camp to camp, and, judging by the
line of what we now term Roman roads, it is most probable that to a
very great extent the ancient routes were taken as the foundation of
the new system developed by the Romans. The details of this system
are given by an authority of contemporary date in _The Itinerary
of Antonine_, which is believed to have been compiled in the third
century, and possibly corrected and added to later. In this work we
find, as regards the County of Dorset, a description of roads which
are easily recognised to-day, roads which are still in use throughout
a considerable portion of their length. It must not be lost sight
of that these roads are in very close connection with some of the
principal British hill-fortresses, which fact would stamp them as being
originally constructed by the British race, though to all appearance
they are grand examples of Roman skill and energy. The main road, the
Via Principalis, of the third and fourth centuries, comes to Dorset
from Old Sarum, in Wiltshire, one of the grandest of British camps;
it passes close to Badbury Camp, and then makes for Maiden Castle,
and onwards to Eggardun, all of earlier date than the Roman invasion.
But notwithstanding this obvious connection, the roads as we see them
now bear witness to the power of Rome, and are, perhaps, some of the
most obvious of the memorials of the past. They are described in the
_XV. Iter._ of Antoninus, with the names of the Roman stations and the
distances between them along the road from Silchester (Calleva) to
Exeter (Isca Dumnoni), which forms a portion of the great Via Iceniana.

After passing Old Sarum, this road crosses the north-east border of
the modern county of Dorset at a small hamlet called Woodyates (near
Cranborne), taking a south-westerly course; it passes over Woodyates
and Handley Down, and is described by Sir R. Colt Hoare as being at
that point “the finest specimen of a Roman road I know.” It runs by
Badbury Camp, and thence to Dorchester, where the direction changes to
due west, parallel with the coast line, and after leaving the county
near Lyme Regis proceeds towards Exeter.

It must not be supposed that this, or any other Roman road, can be
traced exactly throughout its whole course. Far from it: the hand of
the destroyer has been heavy indeed on these relics of the past, built
with a prodigal expenditure of time and material. It is often the
case that the modern “turnpike,” or county, road has been made on the
very site of the ancient road, the old embankment being levelled to
gain additional width. In other places cultivation and the demands of
agriculture may have proved the cause of its obliteration. Here and
there, especially on waste land and heather-clad downs the true Roman
work may still be seen, though covered, perhaps, by grass; but with the
aid of the Antonine _Itinerary_ much may be learnt and many a portion
be recognised. He names, however, only two stations within the county,
and the mileage is short by nearly twenty miles, so in all probability,
through error in copying, one other station has been omitted. The two
stations mentioned are Vindogladia and Durnovaria. Authorities differ
greatly as to the true position of the former of these places; the
other station, however, is remarkable for the proofs of its former
importance. Here we find no less than four roads meeting, from north,
south, east, and west, the east and west roads being the Via Iceniana;
the others are roads of less importance, that to the south leading
to the sea and towards the Roman settlement, Clavinio (or Jordan
Hill), near Weymouth, and that to the north passing Stratton and on to
Ilchester.

Other branch roads were made as necessity required in different
parts of the county. Thus we find traces of a road leaving the Via
Principalis, near Badbury, to connect with the harbour of Poole, and
another, starting from the same point, running northwards. Mr. Warne is
considered to have made a very interesting and clever discovery of a
station which is missing in the _XV. Iter._ of Antoninus. The distance
there given between Vindogladia and Durnovaria is quite obviously too
short by some fourteen miles. But on Kingston Down, near Bere Regis,
the cultured eyes of the learned Dorset antiquarian discovered traces
of a Roman settlement, and on due investigation being made, it was
considered that there was sufficient proof to establish at this point
a station called Ibernium, referred to by other writers as existing in
the county.

The position of Vindogladia, though a subject of long and frequent
debate, and though stated by some to have been at Badbury, by others
at Wimborne Minster, has now been accepted as on Gussage Down, not
far from the north-west border of the county where crossed by the Via
Iceniana. This is due to the researches of Sir R. C. Hoare, and stands
on a par with Mr. Warne’s discovery of the other Roman station on the
great military road.

       *       *       *       *       *