
We come now to a very interesting period of the Roman occupation,
when we may imagine the military operations at an end, a firm and
beneficial government established, and the colonists (at any rate),
who usually obtained a third part of the conquered territory, becoming
rich and enabled to build those houses that must have been the envy and
admiration of the native population, with their decorative floors and
walls, and ample comforts for seasons of heat or cold.

Still, as we have said before, it is not to any printed records that
we can turn for its history, but rather to the result of careful
excavation and the relics unearthed after fifteen centuries’ burial
in the soil: in a word, we trust to the use of the spade for bringing
before our minds the life of the past and restoring the memorials of
ancient Dorset.

In Warne’s map of the county, prepared in the year 1865 after most
patient research and personal investigation, there are more than fifty
sites given where relics of the Roman colonisation have been found,
exclusive of Durnovaria. Mr. Moule, writing in 1893, says: “Roman work
of one kind and another has been found here in Dorset in eighty places,
and that for the most part casually.” But year after year this number
is increased, and, truth to tell, so frequent are the discoveries that
in Dorchester the ordinary labourer, when excavating in the streets,
or elsewhere, is ever on the alert, and many a treasure rewards his
watchful care; and even children whose eyes have been trained aright
will find, when digging in some neglected corner of garden or field,
a bit of common pottery, a fragment of Samian ware, or perhaps a coin
bearing the image of an Emperor of Rome. And thus our history is
written: a word discovered here, a sentence there, until the story of
the life of those days may be once more told afresh. The frequency of
these discoveries is so far interesting that it draws attention to the
large area over which the Roman settlers were distributed. No doubt
they found this land of the Durotriges a pleasant land to dwell in, as
we do now in this twentieth century. But here may be said, in passing,
that Roman colonists were partly at least a Roman garrison. They were
frequently old soldiers intended to keep in check the conquered nation,
and liable to be called back to active service. But if there was no
fear of a hostile rising, the military character of the colony would
gradually be lost. And that, no doubt, soon happened here, for the very
great majority of the relics of the Roman occupation are signs of its
peaceful character.

The discovery of the sites of Roman villas scattered in more or less
isolated positions throughout the county tend also to prove this, and
especially when the villa is shown to have possessed one of those
beautiful mosaic floors which can only have belonged to a prosperous
and wealthy colonist or to a British landowner left undisturbed in
his possessions, and who employed the Roman craftsmen to build him
a house. These tessellated floors have been frequently exposed to
view in various parts of Dorset, and too frequently, alas! through
ignorance or carelessness, been neglected or destroyed; others,
again, have been examined, plans or drawings made, and been covered
up once more. Among those which have been described may be mentioned:
Thornford and Lenthay Green, near Sherborne; Halstock, six miles south
of Yeovil; Rampisham, twelve miles north of Dorchester; Frampton,
six miles north of Dorchester; Preston, near Weymouth; Creech, near
Wareham; Fifehead Neville, north-west of Blandford; Hemsworth, five
miles north of Wimborne; and in Dorchester itself no less than twenty
different pavements, either complete or in portions, besides one on the
upper area of Maiden Castle. It is difficult to assign a date, even
approximately, to these villas, for the coins found amidst the _débris_
cover practically the whole period of Roman occupation, and the other
objects generally discovered on the site are not of much assistance.
There are no records of inscribed stones being found, which might
have helped; and, as a rule, the more valuable part of the building
materials, such as cut stones, roof slabs, and timbers, must have been
taken away when the houses were left; but the wells and refuse pits are
the happy and profitable hunting-ground of the antiquary.

The tessellated pavements are so interesting and attractive that it is
worth while to describe them in detail. The system adopted in their
construction seems to have been as follows:—If no provision was made
for heating the rooms by means of a hypocaust or hot-air flues, the
ground was prepared by rough levelling, and 6 to 8 inches thick of
flints rammed, or coarse, gravelly mortar or concrete laid; on this 3
or 4 inches of better class white cement, and above some fine cement to
take the tessellæ; and after these were laid a liquid cement would be
run into the interstices before the final polishing was commenced. The
system of laying is well shewn in the annexed illustration, taken of
a pavement _in situ_, before removal to the Dorset County Museum.

[Illustration: PART OF THE OLGA ROAD TESSELLATED PAVEMENT, DORCHESTER.]

The tessellæ themselves, as generally found in Dorset, consist of
small cubes of stone or brick, but vary in size from about ⅜ or ½
inch to 1½ inch; the smaller are used for the decorative portions;
the larger for the borders, or for passages, or for the floors of
houses of a humbler character. The colours are for the most part only
four—namely: white, dark slate (or blue-black), red, and a sort of drab
or grey; occasionally yellow is found, but not often.

The materials of which the tessellæ are composed has given rise to much
discussion and, indeed, much difference of opinion; but, as a general
principle, it may be assumed that, wherever possible, local stone was
used. The red tessellæ are merely brick or tile of a fine description;
but, as a means of obtaining a scientific opinion of the other stones,
microscopic sections have been cut from the tessellæ and submitted
to an expert mineralogist, who has given them the following names.
The very dark stone is a fine-grained ferruginous limestone; the grey
is also a fine-grained limestone; the drab or yellow is an oolitic
limestone; and the white is a hard chalk, showing foraminifera very
well. It is believed that the colour may be altered by submitting the
stone to heat, an opinion held by Professor Buckman, and explained in a
very interesting chapter of his book, _Roman Art in Cirencester_.

The mosaic floors found in Dorchester are, as a rule, of very simple
but effective design, consisting of geometrical arrangements of the
single guilloche, the twist or plait, the double guilloche (which is
extremely handsome in mosaic work), and the ordinary fret. These, being
arranged as outlines of intersecting squares and circles, leave spaces
of varying dimensions, spandrels, or trefoils, which are utilised
for the introduction of many diverse emblems, such as the fylfot or
swastika, the duplex, sprays of foliage, urns, and interlacing knots.
In the County Museum may be seen laid on the floor (in which position
alone can full justice be done to the skill of the Italian artist) two
nearly complete mosaic pavements. One of these shows the area of three
adjoining rooms, with entrances or vestibules; the other pavement,
found in 1905, is in excellent preservation, measuring 21 feet by 12
feet 6 inches, and is remarkable for two ornamental vases, with two
serpents issuing from each.

The pavement at Preston, near Weymouth, still _in situ_, was discovered
in 1852, the coins found near the villa dating from the middle of the
third century. At Jordan Hill, close by, is the Roman settlement,
Clavinio, which has been productive of a large number of very
interesting relics.

At the entrance to the village of Preston, coming from Weymouth, may be
seen an arch spanning a small stream. The form and masonry of the arch,
as well as its proximity to the other remains here noticed, point to
the probability of Roman construction, and is of special interest, as
examples of Roman masonry are but rarely found still existing in the
county.

The pavement at Lenthay Green was discovered in 1836, and was carefully
removed to the dairy of Sherborne Castle. It contains a representation
of a sitting figure playing on a lyre, and a second figure dancing and
playing a pipe.

The villa on Maiden Castle was discovered by Mr. Cunnington in 1882,
and as a result of his excavations he sent to the County Museum many
interesting objects: fragments of mosaic floor, wall-plaster, and roof
tiles, a curious bronze plate (repoussé work) representing a helmeted
figure holding a spear, and coins from Helena, A.D. 290, to Arcadius,
A.D. 408.

A mosaic floor at Frampton is remarkable for the introduction into the
design of the Christian monogram ☧, known as the Labarum. Extensive
excavations were made here at the end of the eighteenth century,
and four different pavements were found. They contain numerous
representations of heathen deities, Neptune being especially favoured;
a motto worked into one of the borders runs: “_Neptuni vertex regmen
sortiti mobile ventis_,” and some other words partly lost. The
introduction of the monogram of Christ is probably of a later date than
the original work. The pavement is now covered up, but Mr. Lysons,
who superintended the excavations in 1797, obtained accurate drawings
of the whole site, the mosaic work being shown in correct colours on
seven large plates which were published, together with an accurate
description.

[Illustration: TESSELLATED PAVEMENT AT FIFEHEAD NEVILLE, DORSET.]

The pavements uncovered at Fifehead Neville are also of great interest.
The first was discovered in 1881, measuring about 14 feet by 12 feet,
the design consisting of an urn, or vase, in the centre, around which
seven small fish are depicted, and outside them are four sea-monsters,
like dolphins. Coins found here date from A.D. 270 to 340. The second
pavement, found in 1903, requires no description, as we are permitted,
by the Editor of the Dorset Field Club, to reproduce an illustration
which appears in the Club’s _Proceedings_. The general plan of the
design is almost identical with a pavement found in Dyer Street,
Cirencester, though the details are altogether different. They may well
have been designed by the same artist.

       *       *       *       *       *