
Very little has been said, so far, of Dorchester itself, and yet the
modern town is full of memories of the Roman Durnovaria. It lies within
the boundaries of the ancient walls, their position, still plainly
discernible in many places, being marked by broad walks and avenues of
trees. One small portion of the masonry of the wall itself may still be
seen in the West Walk. The position of the gates is also fairly easy to
decide, though no vestige of them remains. The roads which issued from
them have been referred to at a previous page.

It has been asserted recently—and, indeed, proved to the satisfaction
of many local authorities—that the course of a Roman aqueduct can be
traced here and there to the west of Dorchester skirting the adjacent
valleys and hills. It is believed to have been an open water-course,
obtaining its supply from the source of a small stream some twelve
miles distant.

Perhaps, however, the most remarkable relic of the Roman occupation
is the amphitheatre, said to be the best preserved in Britain. It is
larger than the so-called “Bull Ring” of Cirencester, and, being quite
free from trees and bushes, stands out more boldly than the similar
work at Silchester. It is built of chalk, now covered with grass,
somewhat elliptical in plan, the height of the sides being given as
about 30 feet, and the internal measurements 218 feet by 163 feet. On
each side of the entrance there are walks which ascend gradually to the
centre of the mounds, where there are small platforms as if for seating
the principal spectators or judges, but there are no traces of steps
or ledges for the accommodation of the general public; and, judging by
the remarks of early Roman writers, it is very probable that the people
were obliged to stand throughout the public games.

But in addition to these more obvious relics of a bygone age, the
subsoil of Dorchester is full of treasures that emphasise the Roman
occupation. It would be impossible to describe in these pages even
the most interesting of the objects that have been brought to light
in recent years, but it is fortunate that they find their way very
frequently to the County Museum, of which the people of Dorset are
justly proud. It must suffice at the present time to mention that in
its cases may be seen a fine collection of objects made of Kimmeridge
shale; glass hairpins, brooches and bracelets, and a metal mirror;
pottery of all kinds; many examples of mosaic floors, fragments of wall
plaster retaining their brilliant colouring, three curious antefixæ, a
Roman sword handle, which is believed to be almost unique, and a base
and capital of a column of a temple. In looking at these memorials of
the past, and stepping the while on the ancient pavements, the mind is
taken back with irresistible force to the men and women who made use of
them in their daily occupations—the Romans, who for a period of four
hundred years exercised their wise and beneficial influence over the
people of Britain.



