WEYMOUTH

BY SIDNEY HEATH


It has become customary in recent years for topographical and other
writers to depict Weymouth, if not exactly as a town of mushroom
growth, at least as one whose history and antiquity date no further
back than from the time when George III. found its salubrious air so
suited to his health. True, the aspect of the modern town has little
left of its pre-Georgian days to tempt the archæologist or allure the
casual literary worker; but a few hours spent among the old records
of the town would speedily remove this first impression of modernity,
and convince even the most sceptical antiquary that the old town of
Weymouth is one of the most ancient in the county of Dorset. The casual
visitor may, therefore, be forgiven his impression that Weymouth was
founded by George III.; for so nearly were the older buildings swept
away at the time of this royal invasion that even loyal Weymouth
citizens now find it difficult to realise how living a thing was the
ancient past of their town, since whatever was left untouched by the
Georgian builders has been well-nigh destroyed in more recent times to
make way for what is called modern convenience and improvement.

The word Weymouth is derived directly from the Saxon “Waegemuth,”
_waeg_ meaning a wave, that is the sea; and _mutha_, an opening. The
Celtic name for the river Wey, allied to the Welsh word _gwy_, meaning
water, seems to have caused some confusion in the Saxon mind, and have
led them to regard the mouth of the estuary (the Backwater) as the
inlet of the sea rather than the outlet of a small stream.

[Illustration: The Quay Weymouth]

The earliest beginnings of the town are lost in obscurity; yet, even
if we are not prepared to accept the assertion of certain historians
that the Tyrian and Phœnician merchants traded here in their numerous
visits to these shores, we have evidence of a more than respectable
antiquity in some traces and memorials of the Roman occupation, in the
way of roads, coins, and pottery; while at Preston, an almost adjoining
village, remains of a Roman villa may still be seen, and considerable
Roman remains have been found at Radipole.

There are very few records or official documents antecedent to the
reign of William I., and naturally many chasms occur in the continuity
of the recorded history of Weymouth. The earliest mention of the
place is in Saxon annals, which state that King Athelstan, A.D. 938,
granted to the Abbey of Middleton (Milton), in Dorset, in order that
masses might be said for his soul and the souls of his ancestors and
successors, Kings of England:

 All that water within the shore of Waymuth, and half the stream of
 that Waymuth out at sea: twelve acres for the support of the wear and
 its officer, three thaynes and a saltern by the wear, and sixty-seven
 hides of land in its neighbourhood.

The next mention of the place occurs in a Saxon charter of King
Ethelred II., wherein the King gives land to his minister, Atsere,
during his life, and licence to leave the inheritance of it as he
wills. The charter is signed by the King with the sign of the cross;
by Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Oswald, Archbishop of York;
and the Bishops Athelwold, Living, and Hirwold. The date of this
interesting document is either obliterated or was never inserted; but
in 980 Dunstan was Grand-Master of the fraternity of free and accepted
Masons in England, and both he and Oswald died about 988.

We find no further record of Weymouth until 1042, when Edward the
Confessor caused a charge to be brought by Robert, Bishop of London,
accusing his mother, Queen Emma, of consenting to the death of her son
Alfred, of endeavouring to poison Edward, another of her sons, and of
maintaining an infamous connection with her kinsman, Alwin, Bishop of
Winton, to the King’s and her own dishonour. The Queen was ordered to
purge herself by “fiery ordeal,” which she did at Winchester Cathedral
in the presence of the King and his nobles; and, having passed
barefooted and blindfold over nine red-hot ploughshares without harm,
she was adjudged to have cleared herself of the accusations and to have
furnished her accusers with an example of what female chastity is able
to accomplish. The King publicly solicited his mother’s pardon; but
the Church of Winton was not so easily appeased at the charge brought
against its Bishop, and forced the repentant King to submit to severe
penance, and to give nine manors to Holy Mother Church, accordingly—“Ex
libello donatorium Wintoniæ Ecclesiæ, S. Edwardus rex, dedit Portelond,
Wikes, Hellwell, et Waimuth maneriis, cum ceteris aliis, ad Wintoniæ
ecclesiæ”; and this grant was confirmed by a bull of Pope Innocent II.

In _Domesday_ there are several parcels of land separately surveyed
under the name of _wai_ and _waia_, with no additional name to
distinguish them, and they are held by different individuals.

Henry I. granted by a charter (without date) to the Prior and Monks of
St. Swithun, Winton, the ports of “Waimuth and Melecumb, with all their
appurtenances, together with the manors of Wike and Portelond,” which
King Edward gave them, and that they might enjoy all the liberties,
wrecks, and all free customs, by sea and by land, as they had ever
enjoyed them. This charter was confirmed by Henry II.

In the reign of Henry III. the manor appears to have been considered
as a dependency of Wyke, and again as appertaining to Portland, but
it is certain that in the early part of this reign it was granted to
Henry Blois, Bishop of Winchester, and his successors, as appears by
the entry on the Charter Rolls. The Bishops did not keep the manor
long, for it soon became the property of the opulent family of Clare,
from whom was descended Edward IV. It would be tedious to trace the
varying fortunes of the Clare family, who were for centuries among the
most powerful in the kingdom; and although much could be written of
the subsequent holders of the manor, the following brief records must
suffice for several decades:—

       *       *       *       *       *