THE ISLE OF PURBECK

BY A. D. MOULLIN


North of the irregular coast-line of Dorset, from Lulworth on the
west to Handfast Point and Old Harry Rocks on the east (a distance of
twelve miles), and extending inland for some five to eight miles, lies
a district of about a hundred square miles in area, known as the Isle
of Purbeck. It is an island only in the same sense as Thanet. It is
bounded on the north by Poole Harbour and the river Frome; on the west,
partly by Luckford Lake, a tributary of the Frome; and an imaginary
line running southward to the rugged coast-line forms its southern and
eastern boundary.

It is strange to tell that this more or less undefined limitation has
had a marked effect on the character and customs of the people who
inhabit the Isle of Purbeck, as compared with the dwellers in the other
portions of the county. They, like the people of Portland, claim for
themselves a distinct individuality, due, possibly, in some measure
to the hereditary rights of quarrying which have done much to keep
families together, and minimised the introduction of a foreign element
into their midst. These quarrying rights have always been jealously
guarded, and the unwritten laws regulating this industry stringently
enforced.

The centre of the island is dominated by Corfe Castle; and such
importance was centred in this old-world town and fortress that the
lord of the manor of Corfe was also Lord-Lieutenant of Purbeck.

Originally the whole of this interesting district was a royal
deer-warren, and much of it was covered with forest. Here Norman and
Plantagenet kings enjoyed the chase; and summary justice was meted out
to those who infringed the Forest laws.

In early times, one of the most important towns in the county was
Wareham; and although it is on the north bank of the river Frome,
one of the boundaries of Purbeck, still it is usually considered to
belong to the island. Of its great antiquity there is, fortunately,
ample record. King Alfred set up a mint in the town; and it was here
that, in 876, he attacked the Danes who had sailed up the Frome to
Wareham, where they soon took possession of the Castle and entrenched
themselves in a strong position behind the walls and earthworks, and
found it a convenient centre for ravaging the neighbourhood at their
leisure. Alfred had meanwhile defeated these Scandinavian pirates in
a sea-fight, which possibly was the first naval victory gained by the
English. Probably disheartened by this defeat, the Danes agreed to
terms of peace, promising to sail away quietly to their own country;
instead of which some of them rode off towards Exeter, hoping to be
joined by the rest of their men in the ships which lay off Wareham.
Their treachery was not destined to succeed, for a mighty storm arose,
and wrecked about a hundred of the Danish ships off Old Harry Rocks,
near Swanage. This loss temporarily broke the power of the northern foe.

The Church of Lady St. Mary in Wareham was in 978 the temporary
resting-place of the body of Edward the Martyr, although the
pre-Conquest Church which occupied the same site has passed away.
It is interesting to think that for more than a thousand years
religious services have been conducted on this spot. Of the several
ecclesiastical buildings once possessed by this town there remain
only three: St. Mary’s, just mentioned, and two others now no longer
regularly used for service.

The Purbeck Hills, which nearly bisect the Isle from east to west,
divide the heathland with its china clay and marshes on the north from
the stone measures known as the Purbeck beds on the south. The chalk
hills of the range attain in places to a height of nearly 700 feet,
and form an imposing barrier when viewed either from land or sea. The
Romans were not slow to discover the properties of the china clay, from
which they made pottery on an extensive scale, and tiles and tesserae
with which to adorn their houses.

Of the many old manor-houses with which this district abounds, space
will only admit the mention of a few. Some three miles to the south of
Wareham is Creech, a very ancient manor, with the house rebuilt in the
seventeenth century. According to Hutchins, the manor is mentioned as
early as Edward the Confessor’s time, and in the _Domesday Book_ it is
said to belong to the Earl of Morton; afterwards, until the dissolution
of the monasteries, it was held by Bindon Abbey, after which it was
given to Sir John Horsey, and towards the end of the seventeenth
century it was purchased by an ancestor of the Bond family, its present
holders. Crossing the densely wooded slope of the Purbeck Hills, and
descending on the other side towards the sea, we find another ancient
manor-house, that of Great Tyneham, built about 1570. It is one of the
largest of the many old manor-houses of that period.

East and West Lulworth, although, strictly speaking, outside the
confines of the Island, are so closely associated with it that a
passing comment may not be out of place. At West Lulworth is a Cove
almost encircled by the distorted and upheaved strata of the Purbeck
beds. These form a natural harbour, which, when once seen, is not
easily forgotten. There is a tradition, which forms the basis of one
of Mr. Hardy’s stories in _Life’s Little Ironies_, that the great
Napoleon was seen here in 1804 seeking a suitable landing-place for
the flat-bottomed barges in which he hoped to bring his legions across
the channel to invade England. If this story is true, how he must have
gazed with interest at the beacon-fires on each promontory and hill-top
ready to be lit to give warning of the impending peril.

About half a mile to the east of the Cove, well above the action of
the sea, are extensive remains of a “Fossil Forest,” with many of the
tree-trunks in position.

The village of East Lulworth, where once stood a monastery, is about
a mile inland from the sea. Near this is Lulworth Castle, the seat of
the Weld family, a conspicuous object looking like a fortress, with its
four massive corner towers, which give the grey stone structure a grim
appearance from the sea. It was built between 1588 and 1609, largely of
stone brought from the ruins of Bindon Abbey; and there is still to be
seen at the Castle an exquisitely carved oak door which is said to have
belonged to the Abbey. The Castle has had many royal visitors—James I.,
Charles II., the Duke of Monmouth, George III., and Queen Charlotte
among the number. The unhappy Mrs. FitzHerbert, morganatic wife of
George IV., was first married to Mr. Weld, and lived here; her portrait
and diamond and pearl necklace are still kept at the Castle.

From Tyneham towards St. Ealdhelm’s Head extend the shallows of
the dangerous Kimmeridge Ledge, with its interesting formation of
bituminous shale underlying the Portland Beds, a kind of coal which may
be easily burnt, and is, indeed, used for fuel by many of the cottagers
of the district, notwithstanding the unpleasant smell it emits when
burning, and the dense shower of soot that falls from the smoke. In the
early part of last century a fire broke out and smouldered for many
months, at Holworth, on a continuation of this outcrop further to the
west, and was known as the Burning Cliff. At times volumes of smoke
arose, the pungent smell of which was distinctly perceptible as far off
as Weymouth when the wind was blowing from the east.

From the days of Sir William Clavel, in the reign of Charles I., the
minerals of Kimmeridge have from time to time been worked, and many and
various have been the schemes for exploiting this bituminous deposit,
and even at the present day samples are occasionally sent for with the
view to extracting mineral oil. But one must go back to a much more
remote period for the first evidence of early workings. The Romans,
during their occupation of this part of the coast, were not slow to
discover the value of this supply of fuel, which may possibly have been
worked long before their arrival.

The expert Roman craftsmen found also that the shale was capable of
being turned and fashioned into various kinds of ornamental articles
resembling those made of jet; so they set up lathes on the spot to turn
out these articles, which, no doubt, met with a ready sale among the
fashionable dwellers in Durnovaria (Dorchester). That the existence of
these lathes was an actual fact is proved by the hundreds of discs or
cores which remain to this day, and are found in and with the Roman
pottery fashioned from the Wealdon clay of the district. These discs
are usually from 1¼ to 2½ inches in diameter, with central holes
to attach them to the lathe mandril, and were the discarded centres of
rings and other ornaments made from the shale. By local tradition these
discs have always been known as “Kimmeridge coal money,” and although
present-day antiquaries laugh at the idea of their ever having been
used as money, the writer ventures to suggest the possibility of the
correctness of such a theory. They are found in considerable numbers
securely hidden away a short distance below the surface of the ground,
usually between stones placed on edge and covered over by another flat
stone. The care with which they were secreted indicates that they
were considered of some value to the owner. May not the Celts have
collected and used them as tallies or tokens? These discs, bearing the
tool marks of the turner, would have been impossible to counterfeit by
the uncivilised races of that day, to whom the use of the lathe was
unknown. The value of local traditionary names is considerable, and the
foregoing appears to be a feasible suggestion as to the authenticity of
the name, “Kimmeridge coal money.”

This part of the coast has a desolate and forbidding appearance, due to
its black, shaley formation.

Looking eastward, St. Ealdhelm’s Head stands out in majestic grandeur,
rising out of the sea more than 350 feet in height, and crowned at
its seaward end by the Norman chapel dedicated to St. Ealdhelm, first
Bishop of Sherborne.

About a mile and a half inland we come upon the little church of
Worth Matravers, in the centre of the village of that name; it is
probably the most ancient building in Purbeck of which anything now
remains. Here we find traces of Saxon work, with that of Norman
added; the chancel arch is a good example of the latter. It is now
generally considered possible that here was one of the two sacred
edifices built by St. Ealdhelm in Purbeck and mentioned in ancient
records. The divided buttress on the north wall, and the grave-stone of
Benjamin Jesty are objects of interest. On the latter is the following
inscription:—

 Sacred to the memory of Benjamin Jesty of Downshay, who departed
 this life April 16th, 1816, aged 70. He was born at Yetminster in
 this county, and was an upright honest man, particularly noted for
 having been the first person (known) that introduced the cowpox by
 inoculation, and who from his strength of mind made the experiment
 from the cow on his wife and two sons in the year 1774.

From Worth Church to Swanage there is a track or path known still as
Priestway, originally used by the priests of Worth passing backwards
and forwards between Swanage and Worth churches, the latter of which
is said to have been the mother-church. Sir Charles Robinson says that
Worth is the Saxon word for village, and that the second half of the
name was added because it was owned by Sir John Matravers, who had
charge of Edward II. during his imprisonment at Corfe Castle.

[Illustration: “KIMMERIDGE COAL MONEY.”]

From the elevated road along the cliffs may be seen a series of
terraces, known locally as Lynchets, cut out on the slopes of the hills
facing the sea; as to the use and origin of these escarpments there
have been many theories and much discussion. That they are artificial
and not natural there can be little doubt, and the labour expended in
their formation must have been enormous. From their position, facing
south-east, south, and south-west, one may fairly assume that their
object was for agricultural purposes. They are to be found in several
other parts of Dorset, as well as in other counties.

Dr. Colley March[54] says the word lynchet is derived from the
Anglo-Saxon _hlinc_, meaning a ridge of land. He tells us that in the
reign of Henry VIII. an Act was passed compelling all farmers with
sixty acres of pasture or arable land to cultivate one rood, where the
soil was suitable, for growing flax or hemp for cordage for the needs
of the navy, and concludes as follows:—

 In fine the law that compelled farmers to cultivate flax, the
 permission to do so in any place they were able to secure, the
 importance of suitable soil, and the necessity of prompt and efficient
 drainage, that could but be obtained on a sloping surface will account
 for a good many of the numerous lynchets of Dorset.

Fully to appreciate the rugged features of the cliffs between St.
Ealdhelm’s and Durlston Head, they should be viewed from the sea,
for the indentations and caverns of this iron-bound coast are indeed
wonderful. All along the sea-board quarrying was carried on for
centuries, and some of the caves are due to the hand of man. Many of
these caverns fulfilled a double duty, providing blocks of stone by
day and sheltering cargoes of smuggled goods by night. This part of
the coast enjoyed quite a notoriety for its contraband trading during
the early part of the last century, and the stories told of the daring
Purbeck smugglers would fill a volume.

Mr. William Hardy, of Swanage, has published an interesting little book
called _Smuggling Days in Purbeck_, in which he tells of many curious
hiding-places for the illicit goods; one he mentions, which long
remained undiscovered, was under the roof of Langton Church, a most
unlikely place to attract suspicion. It became necessary at one time
to double the number of revenue men, or coastguards; and it must have
been a strange sight to see these men setting out for the night’s vigil
carrying a one-legged stool, so that in the event of their falling
asleep they might topple over and wake up. Smuggling became such a
profitable business that most of the inhabitants of the district were
more or less engaged in it.

Although less exciting, and perhaps less profitable, the quarrying
industry was extensively carried on—as, indeed, it had been from very
early times. A walk over the hills from Swanage to Worth discloses
vast numbers of disused quarry shafts, and a few others still being
worked. These hills are literally honey-combed with old workings, which
occasionally fall in, leaving curious depressions on the surface. The
stone lies in thin beds of varying quality, some of the upper ones
being full of fossil remains. The higher stratum of Purbeck marble has
been extensively quarried, and in bygone ages provided the elegant
shafts which adorn the columns of many of our great monastic churches.
The outcrop of marble may be seen in the reef of rocks which extends
beyond Durlston Bay and forms Peveril Point.

Whilst on the subject of quarries, it is most interesting to note the
conditions said to have been granted to Purbeck by an ancient charter.
No man is allowed to open or work at a quarry who is not the son of
parents who were themselves both children of marblers, as they were
called, and this rule was rigidly enforced. Once a year, on Shrove
Tuesday, all the marblers of the district repaired to Corfe Castle
to register their names in the books of the Company of Marblers, and
to pay an annual tribute of a pound of pepper and a football to the
lord of the manor of Ower, as acknowledgment of a certain ancient
right-of-way to that place for the purpose of shipping stone, this
being necessary before there were any facilities at Swanage for so
doing. A good description of this ancient custom is given in Sir
Charles Robinson’s _Picturesque Rambles in the Isle of Purbeck_.

Looking down from the lofty hills upon the little town, a man who had
been absent for twenty or thirty years would hardly recognise in the
Swanage of to-day the village that he had left. Swanage, with its
up-to-date pier, its esplanade and sea-wall, its red-brick villas,
and the various requirements of the modern residents, resembles the
isolated little town of fifty years ago as little as the garden of a
London square resembles a primeval forest. The quaint old stone houses,
with porches supported by pillars, projecting over the foot-way, and
roofed with massive slabs of split stone, the narrow and winding
streets, have nearly all disappeared, but fortunately there are still
some few left to delight the eye of the artist.

The twelfth century tower of the parish church, built originally as
a refuge, and as a means of defence from sea pirates, was standing
long before the rest of the church was built. The Town Hall, although
erected in recent times, is of some historic interest, the front having
been partly built of stones taken from the old Mercers’ Hall in London,
pulled down for street alterations; and this edifice itself is said to
have been mainly composed of material taken from one of Wren’s early
churches, destroyed in the great fire of London in 1666. So, after many
vicissitudes, these weather-worn stones have found a resting-place very
near to the source from whence they were originally taken.

Immediately at the rear of the Town Hall is a curious little structure
of solid masonry, with an iron-studded oak door, resembling a powder
magazine. This formerly stood close to the south door of the parish
church within the graveyard, and was used as a lock-up. Over the door
is the following inscription:—“Erected for the prevention of vice and
immorality, by the friends of religion and good order. A.D. 1803.” A
small hole may be observed in the oak door, and it is said that through
this aperture the boon companions of the incarcerated man were in the
habit of inserting the stem of a long clay pipe, which they used as a
means of supplying him with strong drink, and the bowl of which they
also at times filled with tobacco, in order that he might find some
solace for his weary hours in smoking.

About a mile and a half from Swanage, in the direction of Corfe Castle,
is the manor of Godlingstone, with its interesting old house. This
estate is said to have been part of the hide of land given by William
I. to Durandus the Carpenter, in exchange for certain repairs to be
executed at Corfe Castle. The round tower at the western extremity of
the house is believed to be of Saxon origin, and was probably built as
a place of refuge from the ruthless Danes, who so frequently harried
this part of the coast. Sir Charles Robinson mentions Godlingstone
as having belonged successively to the families of Talbot, Rempston,
Chaunterell, Carent, Pole, Wells, and Frampton.

The manor-house at Whitecliff on the slope of Ballard Down is another
fine old building, and is sometimes credited with having been one of
King John’s hunting lodges; but no trace of so early a building now
remains, unless it be the massive garden walls, with the protecting
tower.

Forming one of the horns of Swanage Bay is Peveril Point, with its
coastguard signalling station, from which extends, in a south-easterly
direction for a considerable distance, a ledge of rocks composed of
Purbeck marble. These rocks follow the general dip of the formation
observable for some distance along the coast—viz., from the south,
sloping down towards the north; but at the extremity of Peveril Point
one observes that the strata to the north of the ledge slope in exactly
the opposite direction.

The beautiful and deeply indented bay of Swanage forms a harbour with
good anchorage, sheltered from all but easterly gales. The northern arm
of the bay, known as Ballard Head, is formed of lofty chalk cliffs,
rising nearly sheer from the sea. The convulsions of nature have
played some curious pranks in this locality, for side by side with the
natural horizontal stratification one may see the layers of chalk and
flints standing vertically. This has enabled geologists to estimate
the probable thickness of these chalk beds, which, according to some
authorities, was nearly a thousand feet. The human mind is staggered by
the contemplation of the ages necessary to accumulate this stupendous
deposit of microscopic foraminifera, of which the chalk is composed,
before it was upheaved from the bed of the sea. The upper greensand,
which is exposed at the western boundary of the chalk, contains many
interesting fossils. The cliffs of Ballard Head terminate at Handfast
Point with several chalk pinnacles and curiously formed caverns. Of the
former, “Old Harry and his Wife” are well known, but, unfortunately,
the upper half of “Old Harry’s Wife” was washed away some years ago,
leaving little more than the base remaining.

The old-world village of Studland, at the foot of the northern slope
of Ballard Down, still retains much of its primitive and picturesque
beauty, and the old manor-house and the little Norman church dedicated
to St. Nicholas are of great interest. This church, like many others,
no doubt took the place of an earlier building, for there are still
traces of Saxon work to be seen in the north wall.

A mile or so to the north-west of Studland, across the swampy
heathland, we come to a conical hill some eighty or ninety feet high,
surmounted by an irregularly shaped mass of sandstone, formed from the
neighbouring Bagshot beds, which, having been cemented together by some
ferruginous substance, has withstood the disintegrating action of the
elements better than its surroundings. It is known as the Agglestone
Rock. Sir Charles Robinson, in his _Rambles in the Isle of Purbeck_,
estimates the weight of this rock at four hundred tons, and gives the
probable derivation of the name from the Anglo-Saxon “hagge” (witch or
hag), or “heilig,” meaning holy, and “stan” (stone).

This barren heathland, spreading over the Bagshot sands, extends for
many a mile, and stretches out to the deeply indented coast-line of
Poole Harbour, forming the northern limit of the Isle of Purbeck. The
wild beauty of this low-lying district can only be enjoyed by those who
are prepared to explore it on foot, for carriage-roads there are none,
and the cart-tracks are not always passable.

The important deposit of china-clay found in this neighbourhood, which
is exported in considerable quantities to many parts of the kingdom,
and even to foreign countries, is chiefly shipped from the little quay
at Ower, which is on an arm of Poole Harbour. Hutchins says that Ower
was once the chief port in the Isle of Purbeck for the export of stone
and marble, and for the importation of timber from the New Forest; but
in 1710 Swanage seems to have superseded it.

The little village of Arne, near to which is Russell Quay, where clay
and peat are shipped by small trading vessels, is merely a cluster of
a few cottages and a plain-looking thirteenth century church, which,
however, contains an object of interest in its stone altar with the
five consecration crosses.

In the woods near Arne is one of the few heronries to be met with on
the south coast; and in the solitude of this remote spot the birds have
bred undisturbed probably for centuries.

From Arne to Wareham, a distance of some four miles, there is a rough
road, by following which we complete our circuit of this interesting
district—the Isle of Purbeck.



