
The original MS. of the old Corfe Castle legend of the Christmas Pie
is still said to be in existence in the Muniment Room at Kingston Lacy
amongst the other Corfe Castle documents.

Lady Bankes’ grandmother, Mrs. Hawtrey, was happy in the birth of many
daughters, who were well instructed in all the maidenly duties of that
good and pious time. Of the use of the needle, and the Greek and Latin
tongues, none could surpass them; and as to playing on the virginals
and clavycorde, it was wonderful to listen to them. But Mistress
Hawtrey did most insist on every young maiden knowing the cookcraft
(for so did she style it) of the kitchen.

  Beauty fadeth like a flower.
  Music can little delight the husband
  When he becometh hard of hearing,

she would say; and then solemnly add:

  The best cook doth always secure the best husband.

Now, to preserve the early lessons so taught to her daughters, from the
day when they could first rest their little chins upon the dresser, she
did have them fully instructed in this art of cooking. And then did
she require of them all a promise, strictly to be observed, that on
every Christmas Day in every year these her daughters should themselves
prepare and set forth upon her table a number of mince-pies equalling
exactly in the sum of them the number of years since the day of her so
happy marriage; and so it was that when she had been married fifty-nine
years complete there did appear upon her table fifty-nine mince-pies.
But in the following year her daughters conspired how, for the yet
greater satisfaction and surprised pleasure of this their beloved
parent, they did, with great labour and curiosity of art, continue
one great and noble pie a born baby might rest therein; and this they
filled with those many and rare refections suitable to the great work
they had in hand: to complete the whole did they upraise on the crown
of the crust the letters L X—two letters large and noble—clearly
denoting thereby the three-score returns of that fertile marriage-day
from whence themselves were so happily sprung. The knowledge of this
rare structure is withheld from the good old dame until the hall is
decked with Christmas garnishings. The pie is placed upon the table,
and the old lady entereth and is seated, but the beholding of this pie
hath an effect on this good old lady far differing from that which then
her beloved offspring intended. Alas! she cannot touch a morsel. A
novelty so strange she cannot realise, nor can she digest the ancient
promise broken. Mayhap she did apprehend whether an ape should leap
forth, or a dwarf, or a Denmark owl, for such conceits had been known
at the banquets of persons of high condition. Be this as it may, the
old lady is carried to her chamber in a swoon; her daughters like
demented beings hurry to and fro—nothing is left unendeavoured on their
parts. The medicine chest is unclosed. Scores of healthful medicaments
are brought forth. They give to her of them all: yet did the good old
lady die, and was laid straight and quiet in her coffin, before the
mince-pie had sufficient time to cool.



