POOLE

BY W. K. GILL


Some, even of those who know a little of Poole, may wonder at the
idea that a town so modern to all appearance should have anything of
antiquity about it. To the motorist, bound westward from Bournemouth,
Poole is a place with an irritating railway crossing at one end, and
an equally provoking bridge at the other. And even to a visitor it
will appear but as a commonplace business town—a town of tramcars and
electric lights, with a big gasworks on the most approved principles,
with wharves piled with timber and quays black with coal, where
the colliers come in and out through a fleet of red-sailed barges
and big white timber-ships; a town whose very Church and Guildhall
are modern, and to whose past only a neglected and mutilated stone
building on the Quay bears the slightest witness. But could we open
the jealously-guarded charter-chest, and unroll one ancient document
after another; could we summon the shadowy file of noble and royal
benefactors, from the famous Crusader, the Gordon of his age, who
granted the first charter, to that Queen of famous memory, who gave us
the last—then, indeed, we should have a pageant fit to compare with
that of any town in Dorset. But Poole’s true pageant would be on the
water, where, too, the harbour would give her an antiquity not her own.
Roman bireme and Saxon keel, Danish longship and Norman galley, quaint
craft of Plantagenet and Tudor, strong-stemmed Newfoundlander, and
raking privateer of the great French War—the shipping that has sailed
in that harbour would bring us down from the Roman period to the long
black destroyers of our own day which sometimes lie in main channel
from Stakes to Saltern’s Pier. The memories of Poole are not in her
ruins, but in her records; for the swift keel leaves no mark, and there
is no more trace of the destroyers that lay there last year than of
Knut’s long ships that lay there nine hundred years ago.

[Illustration: THE TOWN CELLARS, POOLE.]

But let us stroll slowly through the town from the railway station,
not by the High Street, but by way of the Guildhall and the Church of
St. James the Apostle, down to the Quay, noting, as we go, the signs
and vestiges of past days. A few paces from the station is the old
town boundary, denoted by a boundstone let into the wall, and this is
all that remains to mark the position of the embattled gate erected
by charter from Henry VI., and destroyed by order of Charles II.—the
embattled gate recorded by Leland that turned back Prince Maurice in
the great Civil War. It is amusing to note how Clarendon “veils his
wrath in scornful word” as he tells how “in Dorsetshire the enemy
had only two little fisher towns, Poole and Lyme.” Here was the main
entrance from the north through the fortified gate that gave the name
of Towngate Street. (The southern entrance was by ferry, and this way
came Leland, the great Tudor antiquary.) There was a sharp fight at
this point during the Civil War, mementos of which in the shape of
three small cannon-balls were dug up last year, and are now in the
local Museum. The story may be summarised thus: Poole as a seaport
was of great importance, and the King’s party were most anxious
to get hold of it. Attempts were made to corrupt a dashing young
partisan leader, Captain Francis Sydenham, of Wynford Eagle (brother
of the famous doctor, also a soldier then), who was constantly out on
raiding expeditions. Sydenham pretended to yield, but arranged with
the Governor, Captain John Bingham, of Bingham’s Melcombe, to have a
little surprise for the cavaliers. Accordingly, when Lord Crawford with
horse and foot came by night to the outworks that guarded the causeway
over the fosse, he was admitted within the half-moon, but found the
gates fast, while the cannon and musketry opened on him from the wall.
The darkness favoured him, however, and he escaped, but with some loss
of men, and more of horses. The small cannon-balls above mentioned
were in all probability some of those fired at the Royalists from the
wall. This wall, as has been said, was razed by order of Charles II., a
retaliation, possibly, for the part Poole had played in the destruction
of Corfe Castle. The fosse long remained, and, having been deepened
in fear of Prince Charlie as late as 1745, some portion was traceable
within the memory of living persons.

A few years after, the King had an opportunity of seeing how his order
had been carried out—for, the Court being at Salisbury, to avoid
the Plague in 1665, he and some of the courtiers went touring about
East Dorset, and one day was spent at Poole. So on September 15th a
brilliant company rode into the town by the old causeway. There was the
King himself, harsh-featured indeed, but easy and gracious in bearing;
Lauderdale, with his coarse features and lolling tongue; Ashley, with
his hollow cheeks and keen eyes; Arlington, another of the afterwards
infamous Cabal; and, among the rest, but the centre of all attraction,
the handsome, boyish face of Monmouth. Ashley was well known in Poole,
and many a grim Puritan soldier must have muttered Scriptural curses on
his old commander, who had turned courtier for the nonce, but who could
not foresee the day when the flags in the port should be half-mast for
him, and when his body should be brought from his place of exile in
Holland, and the hearse should pass along the very road he had just
ridden so gallantly to the old church of Wimborne St. Giles. Still
less could young Monmouth foresee the day when, twenty years later,
turning and doubling like a hunted hare, he should cross that road in
his desperate and vain effort to reach the shelter of the great Forest.
And little did his father think that Antony Etricke, “learned in the
laws of England,” whom he appointed Recorder of Poole, should be the
man before whom his favourite son would be brought for identification.
Down the street rode the gay cavalcade—plumed hats, curled wigs,
velvets and laces, gallant horses and all—over the open ground that
extended halfway down the town, till they came to the house of Peter
Hiley, which then stood about opposite where now is the National and
Provincial Bank. The house has long since gone, but there they were
entertained by Peter Hall, the Mayor; and afterwards the King went on
the water to Brownsea, “and took an exact view of the said island,
castle, bay, and this harbour, to his great contentment.” For many a
day this visit was remembered, and the cause of the hapless Monmouth
was popular in Poole, so that before his final attempt to reach the
Forest he had entertained the idea of escaping to Poole, and there
taking ship for Holland. A ghastly little note from the Deputy-Mayor of
Poole, instructing the tything-men of Higher Lytchett to take delivery
of certain heads and quarters of rebels executed in Poole, and to set
them up at the cross-roads, is still in existence, and testifies to the
executions of the Bloody Assize.

Further down the street comes a cluster of houses that belong to a
widely different period, both in the history of the town and of the
country. The almshouses, dated 1812, with Nile and Trafalgar Rows on
one side, and Wellington Row, 1814, a little way below on the other,
recall the great French War, when the open ground at this end of
Poole, still called The Parade, though now built over, was the place
of exercise for the troops constantly quartered here. In 1796, the
33rd, then Colonel Wellesley’s, regiment was here, and the Colonel’s
quarters were over the water at the old manor-house at Hamworthy.
But the almshouses, built by a famous Newfoundland merchant, George
Garland, bring back quite a different set of memories. Curiously
enough, the well-known trade with Newfoundland was at its zenith
during the later years of the great war. The English fleet had swept
the foreign flag off the seas, and the trade had fallen to the Union
Jack. But the trade dated from the time of Queen Elizabeth, and lasted
till the middle of the Victorian age. At first the little ships went
out year by year, in the season, and returned with their cargoes of
oil and fish and skins, without making any stay on the island—little
ships of forty to fifty tons, but manned by daring seamen, who faced
the Atlantic storms and the Turkish pirates, as well as French or
Spanish enemies, year in, year out, with no record save now and then
an incidental mention, as when the Mayor of Poole complains to the
Privy Council in 1625 of the danger that the fishing fleets ran from
the Turkish pirates, Sallee rovers, and the like. In after years
settlements were made, and the Poole merchants had their establishments
on the island, from which they supplied the fishermen; but the truck
system was the only one in vogue, and the oils and fish and seal-pelts
were paid for in goods only, the value of which was fixed by the
merchant, who thus got his cargoes at his own price, and, buying his
supplies wholesale in England, made, naturally, very large profits.

For many years Poole and Newfoundland were intimately connected,
but the trade gradually fell off as other countries entered into
competition, and the carelessness, bred by monopoly, made the Poole
merchants far too independent and unenterprising.

Not far down the street lived a merchant of another sort. Sir Peter
Thompson, born in Poole, but for the greater part of his life residing
in London, where he carried on a large trade with Hamburg, built for
his retirement the fine old Georgian house long used as a hospital.
The carved doorway, with its crest and motto, “_Nil conscire sibi_”
(not, by-the-bye, the one usually assigned to Sir Peter, which is
“_Nulla retrorsum_”); the arms and crest displayed above the doorway,
and the height and proportion of the street front, give an air of
dignity to the building strangely in contrast with the neat little
villas recently put up opposite. The house dates from the time
of Prince Charlie, who, indirectly, was the cause of Sir Peter’s
knighthood. As High Sheriff of Surrey, the fine old Whig presented
a loyal address to George II. when the throne was in danger after
Prestonpans, and received the honour of knighthood as a mark of the
King’s appreciation. It was in the next year, the year of Culloden,
that Sir Peter began the house in which he meant to spend the close
of an honourable life in the company of early friends, and in the
collection of rare manuscripts and objects of interest, scientific and
antiquarian, for he was both an F.R.S. and an F.A.S.; he also aided
Hutchins in his monumental _History of Dorset_. Respected for his
talents and loved for his kindness, he lived there for some years in
dignified ease, and died in 1770.

As yet it will be observed that we have had comparatively modern
memories of Poole; but as we go nearer to the Quay, which is the most
important element in Poole past and present, we come to older and
older buildings, or rather parts of buildings, for it is a feature in
the town that the constant, active life of the place has renewed, and
so covered up, the old buildings, unlike places whose vigour has long
ebbed away and left them with their antiquities unaltered to sleep away
the remainder of their allotted time,

  And keep the flame from wasting by repose.

And so we pass the modern Guildhall—the old Guildhall was very
suitably placed in Fish Street, on the other side of the town, with
the gaol, in which John Wesley’s grandfather was imprisoned, under
it—and down the market till we pause before the oldest almshouses,
where the authorities have put up an inscription which tells all
that is certainly known of the buildings, viz., that they were first
erected about the time of Henry IV., were the property of one of the
mediæval religious guilds, the Guild of St. George, and were seized
by the Crown in the time of Edward VI., and afterwards sold to the
Corporation. The lower portion and the old wall at the back—in fact,
the stonework—may be as old as the days of Joan of Arc, but there has,
of course, been a great deal of alteration and rebuilding. Speaking of
Joan of Arc, it may be mentioned that John, Duke of Bedford, Regent
of France, under whose rule she was burned, was Lord of Canford and
of Poole, and a few years ago his seal was dug up in cleaning out a
ditch on the Hamworthy-Lytchett road. St. James’ Church is, of course,
new, though built on the site of the old church, a print of which,
with its “handsome tower, covered with a cupola of tin, quite round,
in the fashion of a cup,” is given in Sydenham’s _History of Poole_,
a work of special merit, written by a competent antiquary, and full
of information. Some of the old monumental inscriptions are preserved
in the church, notably one to Captain Peter Joliffe. This worthy
representative of the old Poole seamen distinguished himself in a
sea-fight off Purbeck as follows:—Cruising with only two men in a small
vessel, the “Sea Adventurer,” he saw a French privateer make prey of
a Weymouth fishing-boat. Though the Frenchman was vastly superior in
strength, he boldly attacked him, drove him off, recovered the prize,
and then, following up his first success, manœuvred so skilfully as
to drive him ashore near Lulworth, where the vessel was broken to
pieces and the crew made prisoners. King William III., hearing of this
brave deed, sent Captain Peter a gold medal and chain, with a special
inscription. This was not his only exploit, and in later years George
I. made him military commander of the town. His great-grandson, the
Rev. Peter Joliffe, of Sterte, is still remembered as the pattern of a
good rector.

Old Poole, as we have noted, clustered round St. James’ Church and
the old Guildhall, and, as the remains testify, was mainly of stone,
with the stone-flag roofs, that remind one of their Purbeck home.
Very near to the church, in the yard of the St. Clement’s Inn, is a
small battlemented gateway, supposed to have been a water-gate, a view
which has been lately confirmed by the traces of seaweed revealed
in digging. This is very probably the piece of wall of which Leland
speaks as having been built by Richard III., who “promised large
things to the town of Poole.” Hence, when “Richmond was on the seas,”
and his storm-driven ship appeared off Sandbanks, an attempt was made
to inveigle him on shore; but a warier man than Henry Tudor did not
breathe, and, to the disappointment of the authorities, “he weighed
up his anchor, halsed up his sails, and having a prosperous and
streeinable wind, and a fresh gale sent even by God to deliver him from
that peril, arrived safe in Normandy.”

     Older than the piece of wall, older than the
     almshouses, and older, indeed, than anything else in
     Poole, is that much-battered, much-altered building
     now known as the Town Cellars. The Great Cellar, or
     King’s Hall, or Woolhouse, to give it the various
     names it was once known by, was in all probability,
     as the names import, a place in which goods were
     stored. It was always manor property, rented by the
     Corporation in later years, but more likely originally
     a place used by the lords of the manor of Canford to
     store the dues levied in kind, to which they were
     entitled by the charter of Longespée. On the inner
     side stood a small prison called the Salisbury, also
     belonging to the manor, and by this were the stocks,
     still remembered by old people. Modern conjecture,
     catching at the ecclesiastical appearance of the
     pointed doorways and cusped windows, and ignoring
     the fact that such features were common to sacred and
     secular buildings alike, has imagined a monastery
     here, but the utter absence of evidence, the absolute
     silence of all records, the fact, too, that Leland,
     who visited Poole, and mentions all of importance from
     the antiquary’s point of view, has nothing to say of
     any such institution, and, finally, the authority of
     Abbot Gasquet, whose note on the subject may be given
     in full—“Poole, ‘A Friary,’ _No friary: the grant 3
     Edward VI. seems to have been of gild property_”—seem
     to be conclusive against the theory. The place has
     been cut right through by the street from St. James’
     Church to the Quay, and is so shown on the revised
     Ordnance Map, while the original block is entire in
     a plan of Poole dated 1768. It must have been very
     narrow in proportion to its width, and parts of the
     work are very roughly executed. Possibly this is the
     “fair town house of stone on the Kay” of which Leland
     speaks, unmutilated in his day. Old and battered
     as it is, no inhabitant of the town should view it
     without reverence, for it is part of the long past.
     Built about the end of Edward the Third’s reign, it
     must have played its part in stirring times. Poole,
     during the Hundred Years’ War, was a place of much
     importance, and shared in the ups and downs of that
     long war—now helping to take Calais, and again
     destroyed in the great raid of John de Vienne, who
     paid with fire and sword in the declining years of
     Edward the score run up at Cressy and Calais and
     Poitiers. The old building was the centre of a fierce
     struggle about five hundred years ago. At that time
     the port of Poole was a thorn in the side of Frenchman
     and Spaniard, and its leader, Henry Paye, was the
     dread of the Channel and of the shores of the Bay of
     Biscay. The Drake of his age, half admiral and half
     pirate, he was commander of the King’s ships one
     year and raiding the Spanish coast the next. It is a
     Spanish chronicle that lifts the veil for a moment and
     shows us the Poole of the Plantagenets clustering
     round the Church of St. James and along the Quay,
     its inhabitants ready at a moment’s notice for war;
     archers and men-at-arms mustering to the warcry; the
     very doors so constructed that they could be used as
     “pavaisses,” or large shields, against the murderous
     cross-bow bolts—everything betokening a population
     living in a state of war, and revealing a lively
     picture of the coast towns when there was no regular
     fleet, and self-help was the order of the day. We owe
     this glimpse to the Spanish _Cronica del Conde D. Pero
     Niño_, the substance of which, as far as it affects
     Poole, is given by Southey in his _Naval History of
     England_. The attack on Poole was a revenge raid in
     consequence of Henry Paye’s doings on the Spanish
     coast. Early in the morning the joint Spanish and
     French fleet entered the harbour, and the Spaniards
     landed. Taken by surprise, with their leader away, the
     men of Poole proved their mettle. A large building
     (which we, without hesitation, identify with the Town
     Cellars), full of arms and sea-stores, was fiercely
     defended, and when this had been carried by assault
     and set on fire, the fighting was continued in the
     streets. So terrible was the hail of shafts that the
     Spaniards recoiled, and only the landing of fresh men
     enabled them at last to drive back the English. Henry
     Paye’s brother led the townsmen with great gallantry,
     but was killed on the spot, and then, apparently, his
     men drew off. The Spaniards and their French allies,
     who at first held aloof, but came bravely to help when
     the first repulse took place, then returned to their
     ships with a few prisoners; and the curtain again
     falls.

And so we leave the old town while yet the smoke broods sullenly over
the Town Cellars, and the warcry of Spain yet echoes among the narrow
stone streets of the East Quay.



