PIDDLETOWN AND ATHELHAMPTON

BY MISS WOOD HOMER


The parish of Piddletown, or Puddletown, is said by Hutchins to take
its name from the river Piddle, which flows to the north of the
village, though it is supposed to have been formerly called Pydeletown
after the Pydele family, at one time owners of much property in the
neighbourhood.

It was once a large parish, and the capital of the hundred; but it
now numbers only about nine hundred inhabitants, having fallen from
fourteen hundred during the last forty years. About the year 1860 the
village contained as many as twenty boot-makers, twelve blacksmiths,
twenty carpenters and wheelwrights, five pairs of sawyers, two coopers,
and some cabinet-makers. Gloves and gaiters were tanned and made there,
as were many of the articles in common use. Beer was brewed in the
public-houses; and there were three malt-houses, about one of which we
read in Thomas Hardy’s _Far from the Madding Crowd_. Naturally, these
trades employed much labour, and a great decrease in the population
resulted when they were given up, after the introduction of the railway
at Dorchester, about the year 1848. Two business fairs were formerly
held in the village—one on Easter Tuesday, the other on October
29th—when cattle, materials, hats, etc., were sold. The October fair
still exists, but it has dwindled to a small pleasure fair only, though
pigs were sold as late as 1896.

Piddletown possesses a very fine church, dedicated to St. Mary. It is
a large and ancient building, consisting of a nave and a north aisle
of the same length, covered with leaden roofs, and a small south
aisle, called the Athelhampton aisle, the burial-place of the Martyns
of Athelhampton. This aisle is under the control of the vestry of
Athelhampton Church. The chancel has a tiled roof; it was built in
1576. The embattled tower contains six bells.

The chief features of this church are the monuments in the south aisle,
with some very fine brasses; the Norman font (some authorities on fonts
consider it to be of Saxon work); and the beautiful roof of carved
chestnut wood. This latter has been many times supported and restored,
and it will, indeed, be a loss to the antiquary when it is found
impossible any longer to keep it in repair.

The monuments are all much defaced. One of them, of the fifteenth
century, consists of a knight and lady in alabaster on an altar-tomb,
probably Sir Richard Martyn and Joan his wife; this has traces of much
gilding and painting, but no inscription. To the west of this there
is the figure of a knight, probably placed there about 1400. West of
this again, an unknown “crusader” and lady lie on the floor under
an altar-tomb, with a canopy upon four pillars, which was erected
to the memory of Nicholas Martyn; under the canopy there is a fine
brass, representing Nicholas Martyn, his wife, three sons, and seven
daughters, dated 1595, and bearing an inscription. There is also
a smaller brass, on which is a monkey holding a mirror—the Martyn
crest—while above the whole are three sculptured martins or monkeys.
To the north of the aisle there is a figure of a knight in alabaster,
his feet resting on a chained monkey, the whole supported on an
altar-tomb of Purbeck marble. On the west wall there is a large tablet
to the memory of the Brunes, who owned Athelhampton in the seventeenth
century.

[Illustration: PIDDLETOWN CHURCH.]

On the east of the aisle there is a brass to the memory of Christopher
Martyn, with the following inscription:—

  Here lyethe the body of Xpofer Martyn Esquyer
  Sone and heyre unto Syr Willym Martyn knyght
  Pray for there Soules with harty desyre
  That they bothe may be sure of Eternall lyght
  Callyng to Remembraunce that every wyght
  Most nedys dye, & therefor lett us pray
  As other for us may do Another day.

  Qui quidem Xpoferus obiit XXII^{o} die mens’ M’cii an^{o} D’ni
  millmo quingentesimo vicesimo quarto.

Above this there is the kneeling figure of a man in armour, and a
partial representation of the Trinity. The figure is holding a scroll,
on which the following inscription is much abbreviated: “_Averte faciem
tuam a peccatis meis et omnes iniquitates meas dele_”; while before
and behind the effigies are the Martyn arms. And on the floor of the
church, north of the pulpit, there is a brass to the memory of Roger
Cheverell.

A short staircase of thirteen steps opens out of the south aisle; this
formerly led to a rood loft.

A musicians’ gallery of the seventeenth century runs across the west
of the church, and there are porches on the north and south. The south
door has a ring attached to the outside, which is popularly supposed
to have been a sanctuary ring, though probably this tradition has no
foundation.

It is an interesting fact that the church clock, which was in the tower
till about 1865, was made by a village blacksmith, Lawrence Boyce by
name, about 1710. This clock had a three-cornered wooden face on the
north side of the tower, stone weights and one (hour) hand. It struck
the hours and quarters and chimed at 8, 12, and 4, except on Sundays,
when the chimes were silenced, so that they might not disturb the
worshippers. A clock made by the same man, for Bere Regis Church, is
now in the Dorchester Museum; but, unfortunately, the Piddletown
clock was not preserved, though it was in good going order when it was
removed to make room for the present one.

In 1820, and probably for long before, it was the custom of the members
of the choir to write their own music; some was actually composed by
them, while some was borrowed from other villages, although the rivalry
which often existed between village choirs not infrequently prevented
the exchange of tunes. In two vellum-covered volumes, the property of
Mr. W. Gover, of Piddletown, dated 1823, the music and words of the
Psalms are most beautifully written. The books were given by a certain
Mrs. Price to the choir. The larger book belonged to J. Holland, a
clarionet player; the smaller to W. Besant. In the latter may be
found music headed, “John Besant’s Magnificat,” which was probably
composed by one of his ancestors. At this time the choir consisted of
two clarionets, two bass viols, a flute, and a bassoon; while before
this a “serpent” was used, and the music is written apparently for
all these instruments. The violin was prohibited by most clergymen as
being “Devil’s music,” on account of its being played in public-houses
and for dancing. The instruments were given up about 1845 on the
introduction of a barrel-organ. At this time the village also possessed
a band, which had been in existence for nearly two hundred years, and
of which the inhabitants were justly proud.

Piddletown is perhaps better known as the “Weatherbury” of Thomas
Hardy’s _Far from the Madding Crowd_. On the south-west of the church
is the gargoyle (the head of some beast, with the legs of a child
projecting from its mouth), which destroyed Sergeant Troy’s work at
Fanny’s grave. The old malthouse mentioned in the same book stood in
what are now the gardens of Ilsington House, while Bathsheba’s house
stood on the site of Ilsington Lodge, although it is sketched from the
house at Waterson. The latter is a fine old building about two miles
from Piddletown, and was the residence of the Martyns before they went
to Athelhampton, and remained their property for long after. It was
much damaged by fire in 1863, but was carefully restored by the owner,
Lord Ilchester, to whose family it still belongs. It is interesting
to note that a certain Mr. Bainger, who lived at Ilsington Lodge, was
the moving spirit in causing the lowering of Yellowham Hill, between
Piddletown and Dorchester, about 1830.

The Vicarage possesses a very fine staircase and an oak-beamed study,
while an old farmhouse, now used as a cottage, in “Style Lane,”
formerly contained a fine carved mantelpiece. In the churchyard is the
headstone of Peter Standley, King of the Gipsies, with the following
inscription:—

 In memory of Peter Standley, who died 23rd November, 1802, aged 70
 years.

  Farewell my dear & faithful wife
  My sons & daughters too
  Tho’ never in this mortal life
  Again you must me view
  Close in our Saviour’s footsteps tread
  Of Love divine possessed
  And when you’re numbered with the dead
  Your souls will be at rest.

He is said to have died of smallpox in Style Lane, and to have been
buried by night. Gipsies still visit the grave.

The old coaching road from London to Dorchester runs to the west of
the village, and “Judge’s Bridge,” near Ilsington Lodge, is said to
have taken its name from being the meeting-place of the judge and the
“javelin men” on the occasion of the Dorchester Assizes.

The Court Leet House, wherein was transacted all the local business,
and which was also used as a school, formerly stood in the “Square”;
the stocks, the old village pound, and pump were near. The house
now occupied by Mr. W. Gover was the residence of the Boswells, who
owned land in the parish, and introduced the system of irrigating the
meadows.

Athelhampton Hall is a fine old building east of Piddletown. There is a
tradition that it took its name from some of the Saxon Kings, and was
originally called Athelhamstan; but Hutchins thinks it more probable
that it derived its name from Æthelhelm, one of the Saxon Earls in
Dorset, who was killed in an engagement with the Danes A.D. 837.

The first owners of Athelhampton of whom there is any record were the
de Loundres and Pideles. From them it came by marriage to the Martyns,
who held it till 1595. At the death of Nicholas Martyn it was divided
between his four daughters, who married respectively Henry Brune, Henry
Tichborne, Thomas White, and Anthony Floyer. Gradually the shares of
the Whites and Tichbornes came into the hands of the Brunes, and were
sold by them in 1665 to Sir Robert Long. It then came by marriage to
the Hon. William Wellesley Pole (afterwards Earl of Mornington), whose
son sold it in 1848 to Mr. George James Wood, from whom it came to
his nephew, Mr. G. Wood Homer. It is now the property of Mr. A. C. de
Lafontaine, who purchased it in 1890. The Floyer share of the house
remained in their possession till an exchange was effected by Mr. Wood,
when the whole came into his hands.

The house itself consists of two sides of a quadrangle facing south
and west, and was in a very bad state when bought by Mr. Wood, having,
it is said, been used as a farmhouse, and the fine old oak-roofed
stone-floored hall as a cattle-shed. Mr. Wood entirely renovated the
oak roof, taking great trouble to preserve the original style. He
re-floored the large drawing-room, and made various other extensive
repairs. He removed the gatehouse, which darkened the house, and partly
re-erected it in the form of a summer-house. This has, however, been
again removed by the present owner, who has made many alterations.
The house is built of Ham Hill stone. The east wing is said to be the
oldest part of the present building, and was probably erected by Sir
William Martyn, who died in 1503; while the north wing is thought to
have been built by Nicholas Martyn later in the sixteenth century.

[Illustration: ATHELHAMPTON HALL.]

A small chapel stood on the lawn when Mr. Wood bought the property, but
as this and Burlestone Church were both out of repair, he pulled them
down and built the present church, to a great extent at his own cost.
The chancel of old Burlestone Church is still standing in its overgrown
churchyard, the tombs having all fallen into decay. No churchyard
belonged to the Athelhampton Chapel, Piddletown having always been the
burying-place of the owners.

In a field about a quarter of a mile from Athelhampton, on the land
of Mr. G. Wood Homer, are the grass-grown mounds—the remains of the
hamlet of Bardolfeston, the seat of Drogo de Bardolf, from whom it
came hereditarily to the Martyns. It consisted of a manor, hamlet,
and church; the latter stood at a little distance from the cottages
and manor on what is now known as Church Knap or Knoll. The field in
which the hamlet stood is now known as “Dunditch,” and there is a local
couplet which runs:

  Dunditch was a thriving town
  When London was a vuzzy down.

It is probable that Bardolfeston extended irregularly to Piddletown,
as it is known that cottages and a mill existed between the two, and
Bardolfeston was part of the Piddle Hundred, being sometimes called
Piddle Bardolf.



