WOLFETON HOUSE

BY ALBERT BANKES


The present Wolfeton House, in the parish of Charminster, in the county
of Dorset, is known to have been built by John, father of Sir Thomas
Trenchard, during the reign of Henry VII.; but as the property was
acquired by the Trenchard family (through marriage) from the Jurdains,
and previously the Jurdains had obtained the house and land (also
through marriage) from the Mohun family, it is quite clear that a house
of some description must have existed on the same site as that of the
present residence.

Some archæologists consider that the gatehouse is decidedly of the
Norman period; so, should that be the case, probably the house
inhabited by the Jurdains, before them by the Mohuns, was built soon
after Norman Conquest.

A date is still to be seen on the north side of the north tower, but
whether that refers to the actual building of the towers, or only to
some portion that had been rebuilt or restored, is not known.

[Illustration: WOLFETON HOUSE.]

In a note attached to the pedigree of Trenchard it is stated that the
first Sir Thomas Trenchard rebuilt the house at Wolfeton as it now
stands, except some addition made by Sir George Trenchard; and there
seems no reason to doubt this statement, for a study of the existing
house shows very clearly two distinct dates of building. There are
evidences, also, that Sir Thomas Trenchard’s rebuilding incorporated
many portions of a still older edifice.

Mr. Hamilton Rogers, in his _Sepulchral Effigies of Devon_, says:

 Their last heiress, Christian, daughter and heir of John de Mohun by
 Joan his wife, daughter of John Jurdain, of Wolveton, Charminster,
 married Henry Trenchard (_obit_ 1477), of Hordull, Hants, and
 subsequently of Wolveton.

His descendant, Sir Thomas Trenchard (_ob._ 1505), rebuilt this fine
old mansion, and carved on escutcheons over the gateway; and first
among the noble series of genealogical shields in the hall windows were
the arms of Trenchard. Traces of the great Devonshire family of the
Mohuns are not infrequently found in Dorset.

The elevation of the south front of Wolfeton House remains very much as
originally erected, and is of two distinct styles of architecture—the
portion of the building to the east being in the Tudor-Gothic, probably
of the time of Henry VII., and the west portion in the Elizabethan,
or, more probably, Jacobean style. The latter portion is a picturesque
example of this pseudo-classical style of architecture and nothing
more. The older part of the building, however, possesses features which
are worthy of notice, as the rich labels over the windows are composed
of hollow mouldings filled with rolls of sculptured fruit and foliage,
and terminating in quaint corbels carved with great spirit.

Hutchins says:

 The ancient seat of the Trenchards here is a noble building, and at
 the time when it was built perhaps the best in the country; it is a
 large fabric, its principal fronts to the east and south. On the north
 it is sheltered by a grove of trees.

 One enters on the east into what formerly was a small court, and
 on both sides of the gate is a round tower. In this front are many
 windows, almost all of them different from each other, as if the
 architect had studied irregularity. This seems to have been the humour
 of that age, for Dugdale remarks that:

 At Tixall, co. Stafford, the seat of the Lord Aston, there is a
 fine piece of masonry, built in the reign of Henry VIII.: though
 the windows are numerous, scarce two of them are alike, and there
 is the same variety of fretwork of the chimneys; so that the beauty
 of the structure in that age did not, as in the present, consist in
 uniformity, but in the greatest variety the artist could give.

 On the north side of Wolfeton House there was a small cloister leading
 to what was the chapel, in which some of the family were married
 (within memory), but it has since been pulled down. To the west of the
 chapel there was a little court.

From Powel’s _Topographical Collections in Devon and Dorset_ (A.D.
1820) we learn that a great deal of the back of the house had been
destroyed, and the whole of the fine glass (with the exception of five
or six shields) was taken down, amounting to 100 lbs., and sent to Mr.
Trenchard’s other house at Lytchett; but it was so badly packed that
when the case was opened almost the whole of the glass was pounded or
broken to pieces, so that very little was preserved.

The only remaining portion of the eastern front is the old gateway, the
most distinctive feature of the house. The entrance gate is flanked by
large circular towers capped by conical stone roofs. That on the south
side is somewhat larger than its fellow, as well as standing a little
further eastwards. The arch of the entrance gateway has continuous
mouldings east and west, with a label over. The eastern label contains
a shield bearing the following arms:—Quarterly, 1 and 4, Trenchard; 2,
Mohun; 3, Jurdain; and an inescutcheon, Quarterly 1 and 4, 3 lozenges;
2..., 3.... The western label terminates in figures holding shields on
which are two T’s combined with T. E. united by a tasselled cord. Above
the apex of the arch similar initials appear interlaced, and over all
T. T. combined.

Over the door within the gateway are three escutcheons on stone: (1)
An angel holding a T [transcriber; fractur script], and at the points
T. E. (2) The arms of Trenchard. A little to the south of the gateway
is a building, on which is this inscription: “_Hoc opus constructum
fuit An’ Dni._—MCCCCCXXVIII.” The tower, together with the series
of rooms connecting the gatehouse westwards to the main house, are
comparatively modern, as also is the entrance porch. These buildings
form the present north front of the house, and over the porch are
sculptured the arms of Weston.

The chapel mentioned by Hutchins as having formerly stood on the
north side of the house has long since vanished, but traces of its
foundations were discovered during some excavations made about fifty
years ago.

Turning to the inside of the house, we find much to interest both the
antiquary and the architect.

Before the hall was destroyed and replaced by the present dining-room,
over the large chimney-piece there were carved representations of
fourteen Kings of England, which, says Hutchins, “are said to resemble
the figures in the first edition of Rastell’s _History of England_,
ending with Charles I.” Aubrey, in his _Miscellanies_, states that on
November 3rd, 1640 (the day on which the Long Parliament began to sit),
the sceptre fell from the figure of Charles I. while the family and
a large company were at dinner—an ill omen, the full import of which
could not have been realised at the time. Opposite to these sculptured
monarchs were the figures of an abbot, a soldier, and some esquires. On
the screen were the arms and quarterings of the Trenchard family.

From the hall a large stone staircase led to the dining-room, a noble
apartment, adorned, says Hutchins, “with a noble bay window, in which
stood an octagon marble table on four wooden lions.”

The interior of the western portion of the house—_i.e._, of the part
built by Sir George Trenchard, is composed of two storeys, of which
the lower seems originally to have constituted a single apartment.
Both storeys were very richly decorated; the flat ceiling of the first
storey is covered with an arabesque of plaster, embracing foliage and
various devices, finishing with large central pendants.

The upper floor had a lofty vaulted ceiling, corresponding with the
high pitch of the roof of a similar character. Unfortunately, this
ceiling has been utterly destroyed—a dreadful piece of vandalism, as
the tracery of the pendants and ceiling must have equalled, or even
surpassed, that of the lower rooms. This upper apartment now forms a
series of bedrooms, in the centre of which is the original sculptured
stone chimney-piece, having under the cornice a large panel, whereon is
depicted a figure reclining on a couch surrounded by dancers.

The magnificent carved oak doorway and chimney-piece in the east
drawing-room were sent to Sir Thomas Trenchard by Philip and Joanna at
the same time that they presented him with their portraits and a china
bowl. The following description of the chimney-pieces in the east and
west drawing-rooms is given by the county historian:—

 Chimney-piece No. 1, in the east drawing-room, the height of the room,
 consists of an arrangement of entablatures one within the other, the
 upper and outer cornice being supported by lofty Corinthian pillars
 with rich capitals; immediately beneath this are two large sunken
 panels, respectively containing figures of Hope and Justice, separated
 by male caryatides, which by their different costumes are intended
 perhaps to typify a citizen, knight, and esquire.

 Within the innermost cornice, and immediately surrounding the
 fireplace, is a series of panels of great interest, displaying
 rural and hunting scenes, trades, satyrs, heads, etc., quaintly but
 faithfully carved.

 Chimney-piece No. 2, in the west drawing-room, is similar in its
 general character; the principal subject amongst its decorations
 represents the contest of the goddesses in the garden of the
 Hesperides.

One of the most beautiful examples of carving is an inner door-case in
the east drawing-room, the arch over which has a richly moulded soffit,
and carved heads in the spandrils; over the door, rich Corinthian
pillars, flanked by sculptured figures of a king in armour and a queen,
support a cornice surmounting a large sunken panel.

In the front of the cornice is a shield bearing the following
arms: _Quarterly_—1 and 4, _Trenchard_; 2, _Mohun_; 3, Semée of
cross-crosslets, a lion rampant, _Jurdain_.

[Illustration: THE EAST DRAWING-ROOM, WOLFETON HOUSE.]

There is, of course, much else to interest the antiquary in the way of
old furniture and objects of art, and any visitor will be “charmed with
the admirable manner in which the art of the modern furniture has been
adapted to the character of the old house, lending its aid to heighten
rather than to detract from the beauty of the antique carvings and of
the interior.”

A curious legend in connection with the dining-room is that of the
ghost of Lady Trenchard having made its appearance immediately _before_
her death. Anyone, of course, can believe as much or as little as he
likes about the ghost part of the story, but of the fact of the lady’s
suicide there is no doubt. During the ownership of Sir Thomas Trenchard
one of the Judges of Assize came to Wolfeton House to dine; but no
sooner had the company sat down than his lordship, greatly to the
surprise of everyone, ordered his carriage and abruptly left the house.
On their way back to Dorchester he told his marshal that he had seen
standing behind Lady Trenchard’s chair a figure of her ladyship with
her throat cut and her head under her arm. Before the carriage reached
the town a messenger overtook it on horseback with the news that Lady
Trenchard had just committed suicide.

As to the dining-room as it now stands, it may be mentioned that
Wolfeton, like many other old houses of the same period, suffered
greatly at the hands of those who in the last century were wont to pull
down one-half of their houses to repair the other half. This appears
to have happened to Wolfeton House, as, judging from an old engraving
of the house, the dining-hall must have been quite twice, or more than
twice, the size of the present room.

Of the historical anecdotes connected with Wolfeton House, the visit of
the King and Queen of Castile is, perhaps, of the greatest interest.

In the early part of the sixteenth century, Philip, Archduke of
Austria and King of Castile, set forth with a great armada, with
the intention of surprising the King of Aragon, but he had scarcely
left the coast of Flanders when, encountering a violent storm, he
was compelled to put into Weymouth in distress. King Philip and his
Queen were invited to Wolfeton House by Sir Thomas Trenchard, then
High Sheriff, and were hospitably entertained. And with this visit
the origin of the Duke of Bedford’s family is curiously mixed up;
for on the arrival of the King and Queen, Sir Thomas Trenchard,
being unacquainted with the Spanish language, found a difficulty in
conversing with his guests. In his dilemma he had recourse to his
cousin, John Russell, of Kingston Russell, who, being a good linguist,
became a favourite with the King, and was recommended by him to Henry
VII., who appointed him to an office in the royal household. In the
succeeding reign Russell was also popular, and the confiscation of
Church property during this period rendered it possible for Henry VIII.
to bestow upon him extensive lands. And thus was founded the great
Bedford family.

In acknowledgment of his hospitality Sir Thomas Trenchard was presented
by the King and Queen of Castile with some very valuable china vases,
together with their portraits, all of which are now at Bloxworth House,
near Wareham. They also presented to him the carved chimney-piece and
doorway still standing in the drawing-room at Wolfeton House, as before
described.

Engraved copies of the oil-paintings of the King and Queen of Castile
hang on the left-hand side of the staircase, alongside of which is a
Spanish engraving of the poor Queen Joan, when sorrow at the death
of her husband had sent her mad. On their way to the Royal Mausoleum
the funeral _cortège_ had to pass a night at a nunnery. In the middle
of the night the poor mad Queen suddenly asked where they were. “In
a nunnery,” was the reply. “I will not have my husband surrounded by
all these women,” exclaimed the Queen; so the _cortège_ immediately
removed, and spent the remainder of the night, until daylight, in the
open country.

In the ancient gatehouse of Wolfeton the winding staircase of forty-one
oaken steps appears to be quite unique: there are nine stone steps at
the base, twenty-four of oak to the first floor level, and seventeen
leading to the garret above. For years (some think one hundred) this
staircase must have been a complete ruin, as is easily seen by the
decayed state of those steps opposite to the two windows, the wind and
the rain having beaten in on them for many years.

In addition to the King and Queen of Castile, other royal visitors have
from time to time honoured Wolfeton House with their presence, and
during the residence of George III. at Weymouth the King and Queen paid
it frequent visits. On one occasion, when George III. admired a marble
table that used to stand in the drawing-room, the Trenchard of that day
immediately presented it to His Majesty, and the table is now in the
royal dairy at Frogmore, Windsor.

No account of Wolfeton House would be complete without some allusion to
the story of the Roman Catholic priest. In the time of Queen Elizabeth,
when it was the object of the then Government to stamp out in every way
the Papal influence in England, the Weld family had a Roman Catholic
priest concealed at their house at Chideock, in Dorset. Sir Thomas
Trenchard, who then resided at Wolfeton House, and was a personal
friend of Mr. Weld, of Chideock, happened to be High Sheriff of the
county of Dorset for that year, and received orders to go over and
search for the priest therein concealed. On account of his friendship
with Mr. Weld, Sir Thomas, on reaching Chideock, made a most cursory
search, and left with the intention of reporting to the authorities
that he could find no signs of the priest; but, unfortunately, as he
was leaving, the villagers, whose sympathies were Roman, not aware of
his benign intentions, began hooting and calling the High Sheriff and
his constables a pack of blind owls for not being able to find the
concealed priest. “If that’s what you want,” exclaimed Sir Thomas,
losing his temper, “I’ll soon show you I am not so blind as you think!”
and, surrounding the mansion with his constables, a real search was
made, and the poor priest was soon discovered and brought over to
Wolfeton House as a prisoner. The priest, a highly-educated French
gentleman, made himself so agreeable that Sir Thomas Trenchard did all
in his power, by writing to the authorities, to save his life; but the
Government of that day was so desirous of making an example, that all
entreaties were in vain—the poor priest was executed, and, it is said,
was also drawn and quartered in the High Street of Dorchester.



