THE LITERARY ASSOCIATIONS OF DORSET

BY MISS M. JOURDAIN


“Dorset has continued Dorset alone from time immemorial,” and its
special character has been more carefully preserved and fixed than that
of any other English county in the work of two Dorset poets, William
Barnes and Thomas Hardy, one of whom has succeeded, like Mistral in
France, in making its native language a literary medium known beyond
its spoken limits.

Dorset’s earlier poets,[61] however, have not been “local”; and it
is characteristic of Matthew Prior that, in the account drawn up by
himself for Jacobs’ _Lives of the Poets_, he describes his father as a
“citizen of London,” and that though the first entry against his name
on his admission as pensioner at St. John’s College, Cambridge, is
_Dorcestr_, it has been altered by a later hand into _Middlesexiensis_.
In spite of conflicting entries, it is now generally admitted that
Prior, _perennis et fragrans_—the motto upon the modern brass to his
memory in Wimborne Minster[62]—was born at or near Wimborne, in East
Dorset, the son of George Prior, who is said to have been a joiner.

“With regard to the family of Prior, the tradition of Wimborne says
that his father was a carpenter, and one house he lived in is pointed
out: it is close to the present Post Office, and is called the house
in which the poet was born. The other was pulled down, but its site is
known.”[63]

Local tradition makes Prior a pupil at the free Grammar School; and of
the unusually large library of chained books in the old church, one was
said to be a standing testimony to his carelessness—a chained folio
copy of Ralegh’s _History of the World_, in which a hole is said to
have been burned by the boy when dozing over the book by the light of a
smuggled taper. Unfortunately for the floating tradition, it has been
stated that this particular defacement is the work, not of a candle,
but of a red-hot poker. Still more unfortunately, it has been proved
that the _History_, with other books, was placed in the library[64] at
a much later date than Prior’s boyhood.[65]

Almost a century later a poetic “Court” was held at Eastbury, in North
Dorset, by George Bubb Dodington, Lord Melcombe, who is not interesting
as a poet[66] himself, but as the cause of poetry in others, the last
of the patrons, a curious, gorgeous, tawdry figure, fit to be seen
through the coloured glass of Macaulay’s ridicule. He was the easy
mark for dedications and compliments from many of the best-known
writers of the day—poets utterly discrowned, and those on whose brows
the laurel grows very thin and brittle; Edward Young, Thomson, and
Fielding mention him; while his Great House at Eastbury is celebrated
by Thomson, Young, and Christopher Pitt,[67] who writes, somewhat
oddly, of this “new Eden in the Wild.” The pleasures of this “Eden”
appear, from an epistle of Pitt, to have been smoking and drinking,
with conversational intervals. Dr. Young (of the _Night Thoughts_) sits
with “his Dodington,”

  Charm’d with his flowing Burgundy and wit,
  By turns relieving with the circling draught
  Each pause of chat and interval of thought;
  Or, through the well-glazed tube, from business freed,
  Draw the rich spirit of the Indian weed.

Thomson’s “Eastbury”—

                Seat serene and plain
  Where simple Nature reigns,

is as bad, in its way, as Pitt’s “Eden”—serenity, plainness, and simple
nature being the most unlikely characteristics of Dodington,[68] whose
heavy figure was arrayed in gorgeous brocades; and whose equally
magnificent State bed was “garded and re-garded” with gold and silver
embroideries showing by the remains of pocket-holes, button-holes and
loops that they came from old coats and breeches. This great house,
after Dodington’s death, was taken down all but one wing and sold
piecemeal by Earl Temple, his heir.

Henry Fielding, one of the Eastbury circle—he dedicated to Dodington an
epistle on “True Greatness”—was brought up as a boy in the manor-house
at East Stower,[69] where he was taught by the Reverend Mr. Oliver,
curate of the neighbouring village of Motcombe, said to have been
the original of Trulliber, a portrait drawn “in resentment of some
punishment inflicted on him,” according to Hutchins.[70] Fielding was
fortunate in another portrait, for it is generally admitted that the
prototype of Parson Abraham Adams was William Young, Incumbent of
West Stower, who had many of Adams’ eccentricities. As an instance of
Young’s absence of mind, it is said that when chaplain to a regiment
in Flanders he “wandered in a reverie into the enemy’s camp, and was
only aroused from his error by his arrest. The commanding officer,
perceiving the good man’s simplicity, allowed him to return to his
friends.”

At East Stower, too, Fielding lived for a time with his first wife.

William Crowe, though like Fielding only a short time resident in
Dorset, is admitted on the strength of his topographical poem,
_Lewesdon Hill_, of which Rogers thought so much that when travelling
in Italy he made two authors his constant study for versification,
Milton and Crowe.[71] Crowe’s _Lewesdon Hill_ is a perfect example
of an eighteenth century didactic and descriptive poem, with all the
heaviness due to the requirements of an age which, like Horace Walpole,
called for “edification” in its art. As in Goldsmith’s _Traveller_ the
person who speaks the verses sits pensively on an Alpine height, so
Crowe in his poem is supposed to be walking on the top of the hill on
a May morning—a hill, it has been suggested, that Fuller[72] may have
climbed before him, and where the wide prospect, “standing where Moses
stood when the Lord showed him all the land,” may have prompted the
title of his book, _A Pisgah Sight of Palestine_, which he wrote when
at Broadwindsor. Upon this hill, where

  The lonely thorn
  Bends from the rude south-east with top cut sheer,

Crowe surveys the outspread map of the county—Shipton Hill, Burton
Cliff, Eggardon Hill, the rich Marshwood Vale—in winter

  Cold, vapourish, miry, wet,

to the “rampire” of Pillesdon, even the “nameless rivulet” (the
minutest trickle of a stream at the foot of Lewesdon Hill), which, he
rejoices,

                    Yet flows along
  Untainted with the commerce of the world.

William Lisle Bowles, author of faint and forgotten verses, is
remembered by Coleridge’s early admiration for his sonnets. His father,
the Rev. W. Bowles (rector of Uphill), planted and improved Barton Hill
House, in Dorset, which the poet sold. On leaving it the poet wrote
verses full of regret for

      These woods, that whispering wave
  My father rear’d and _nurst_.

An author unknown outside his county is John Fitzgerald Pennie (buried
July 17th, 1848). He was born at East Lulworth, March 25th, 1782, and
is known as a dramatic writer. He published _Scenes in Palestine,
or Dramatic Sketches from the Bible_, 1825; _Ethelwolf_, a tragedy,
1821, etc. He followed in his early years the profession of an actor,
but after a chequered and unsuccessful career, settled in his native
village and devoted himself to literary pursuits. He published his
autobiography in 1827, _The Tale of a Modern Genius, or the Miseries of
Parnassus_. In 1810 he married Cordelia Elizabeth, daughter of Jerome
Whitfield, a London attorney. He and his wife died within a few days of
each other, and were buried in the same grave.

Wordsworth’s connection with Dorset is of short duration, but is of
interest as occurring at a critical period in his career. On his
receiving Raisley Calvert’s legacy, he was able to live with his sister
Dorothy at a farmhouse at Racedown,[73] which he was allowed to occupy
rent free on condition that the owner might spend a few weeks there
from time to time. It was in the autumn of 1795 that he settled there.
His house is set upon the north-west slope of the “rampire” Pillesdon,
in a hollow among hills cultivated to their summits, or patched with
gorse and broom, which open here and there to allow glimpses of the
sea. The Dorset peasants in Wordsworth’s time were wretchedly poor,
their shapeless cottages “not at all beyond what might be expected in
savage life,” as Dorothy Wordsworth wrote. Very little trace of the
peculiar quality of the place is to be found in Wordsworth’s poems, but
it was here he wrote the first of his poems of country life, modelled
with an experience so personal as to keep every sentence vividly
accurate.

It was here that he watched[74] the “unquiet widowhood” of Margaret,
drawing out the hemp which she had wound round her waist like a belt,
and spinning, as she walked backwards before her cottage door. Here, no
doubt, he saw her ruined cottage—there are many crumbling shells and
ruined cottages in the district to-day—with the red stains and tufts of
wool in the corner-stone of the porch where the sheep were permitted to
come and “couch unheeded.” The garden, run wild, too, is to be met with
to-day:

                          Its matted weeds
  Marked with the steps of those, whom, as they passed,
  The gooseberry trees that shot in long, lank slips,
  Or currants, hanging from their leafless stems
  In scanty strings, had tempted to o’erleap
  The broken wall. I looked around, and there,
  Where two tall hedge-rows of thick alder-boughs
  Joined in a cold damp nook, espied a well,
  Shrouded with willow-flowers and plumy fern.

Here, too, was Goody Blake’s cabin:—

      On a hill’s northern side...
  Where from sea-blasts the hawthorns lean
  And hoary dews are slow to melt.

“The muffled clamour of the outside world only reached the secluded
farmhouse at Racedown after long delay”—in other words, letters
were delivered there but once a week; and on one occasion at least
Wordsworth asks to have a book franked, otherwise he will “not be able
to release it from the post-office.” A part of this time was given to
gardening, and, no doubt from motives of economy, almost all the meals
consisted of vegetables. “I have been lately living,” he writes, “upon
air and the essence of carrots, cabbages, turnips, and other esculent
vegetables, not excluding parsley.”[75] At another time he sets forth
to warm himself, like Goody Blake, by gathering sticks strewn upon
the road by the gale; and his habit was to take a two hours’ stroll
every morning, and now and then a long expedition on foot. He and his
sister, as the Cumberland peasants said, were “a deal upo’ the road,”
and many times they must have walked more than forty miles in the day.
There is a story still current in the neighbourhood that Wordsworth
once borrowed a horse to ride into Lyme Regis, and returned on foot,
having _forgotten_ the horse! With all its hardships and frugalities,
Dorothy Wordsworth loved Racedown. It was “the place dearest to (her)
recollections upon the whole surface of the island,” and she speaks
warmly of the scenery on Pillesdon, Lewesdon, and the view of the sea
from Lambert’s Castle—which is said by some to be _the_ view of the
county.

Landor’s thought, that “when a language grows up all into stalk, and
its flowers begin to lose somewhat of their character, we must go forth
into the open fields, through the dingles, or among the mountains, for
fresh seed,” would have been endorsed by both Wordsworth and Barnes
alike, but with very different ideas as to what was considered fresh
seed. Barnes’ innovation was an innovation of the letter rather than
the spirit, the literary use of the local dialect which he heard in
his boyhood, and which, he said, was spoken in the greatest purity in
villages and hamlets of the secluded Vale of Blackmore, a valley so
secluded that its life was practically the life of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries until the nineteenth was far advanced. He
attributes his poems’ freedom from “slang and vice” to this seclusion;
but it is as much due to his personal[76] preference of light to
darkness. His rustics are, as a rule, happy people.

[Illustration: WILLIAM BARNES.]

At Rushay, William Barnes spent his early days, and he was educated at
the day school at Sturminster Newton. Somewhere along the road from
Bagber to Sturminster was a haunted house, about the exact locality
of which he gave no information beyond that a “dark, gloomy lane led
to it.” He once pointed out the lane to grand-children as the place
their “great-grandfather was riding down, when all at once he saw the
ghost in the form of a fleece of wool, which rolled along mysteriously
by itself till it got under the legs of his horse, and the horse went
lame from that hour, and for ever after.” Barnes was of pure Dorset[77]
stock. His long life was lived almost entirely in Dorset; and when at
Mere, in Wiltshire, a stone’s throw from his own county, he “always
yearned for Dorset and Dorchester.” Latterly he lived near Dorchester,
where, until 1882, “few figures were more familiar to the eye in the
county town of Dorset on a market day than an aged clergyman, quaintly
attired in caped cloak, knee-breeches and buckled shoes, with a leather
satchel slung over his shoulders and a stout staff in his hand. He
seemed usually to prefer the middle of the street to the pavement, and
to be thinking of matters which had nothing to do with the scene before
him. He plodded along with a broad, firm tread, notwithstanding the
slight stoop occasioned by years. Every Saturday morning he might have
been seen thus trudging up the narrow South Street, his shoes coated
with mud according to the state of the roads between his rural home and
Dorchester, and a little grey dog at his heels, till he reached the
four crossways in the centre of the town. Halting there, opposite the
public clock, he would pull his old-fashioned watch from its deep fob
and set it with great precision to London time.”

An unusual union of scholar and poet, his little Dutch pictures are
free from the dull undertone of the conventional manner that Burns
occasionally fell into. Indeed, he has more affinity with the Provençal
poet and lexicographer, Mistral, than with Burns or Béranger, with
whom he is usually compared. He is perhaps mistaken in his belief that
the Dorset dialect is “altogether as fit a vehicle of rustic feeling
and thought as the Doric as found in the Idyllics of Theocritus.” But,
after making this exception about the “fitness” of his Doric, there
remains in his clear, untroubled poems of still life, in his unaffected
eclogues, no small affinity with Theocritus. There is a charm in his
limitations; he belongs not to England, but to Dorset; not to Dorset,
but to the Vale of Blackmore, where the slow, green river, his “cloty”
Stour, with its deep pools whence leaps the may-fly undisturbed by
anglers, is the stream dearest to his memory.

Barnes was Mr. Hardy’s near neighbour and personal friend—Mr. Hardy’s
house is less than a mile from the Rectory of Winterborne Came—and both
have been interpreters of the life—especially of the vanished life—and
character of their pastoral county. In every other respect they are as
different as is “Egdon” Heath from Blackmore Vale.

It is difficult to say in what form of topography Mr. Hardy is at his
best within his “kingdom”—his patient and precise creation of a town
such as “Casterbridge” (Dorchester), the architectural individuality of
his great houses, or his knowledge of “those sequestered spots outside
the gates of the world,” and of woodlands and wildernesses. He has the
knowledge with which he credits Angel Clare of “the seasons in their
moods, morning and evening, night and noon, in their temperaments;
winds in their several dispositions; trees, waters, and clouds, shades
and silence, _ignes fatui_; constellations and the voices of inanimate
things.” In most cases, the birthplace of a novelist has no particular
significance in relation to his work. Very often a writer’s county is
like Matthew Prior’s, exchanged for Middlesex. But in the case of Mr.
Hardy it is different. The fact that he was born in a “mere germ of a
village” near Dorchester, and within sound of a heath; that his life
has been spent, for the most part, in Dorset; that he now lives on the
outskirts of Dorchester, and that he comes of a Dorset stock—tracing
his descent, however, from John le Hardy (son of Clement, Governor of
Jersey in 1488), who settled in the West of England before the end of
the fourteenth century—are significant points in his biography.[78] By
the circumstances of birth and lifelong residence the background of his
novels, _Wessex_, has become mainly limited to Dorset (South Wessex),
and especially to the neighbourhood of Dorchester.

The interest of Mr. Hardy’s backgrounds is twofold. There is their
purely artistic interest as intensifying action and character; there is
also their topographical interest. Mr. Hardy’s imaginary kingdom was
so unlike the photographer’s “studio backgrounds” of other novelists
that long before sketch-maps of Wessex were prepared and published in
the uniform edition of his works the identity of many of his scenes
afforded no manner of doubt to Dorset readers. The precision with
which he describes a building or a neighbourhood, notes position,
distance, proportion, has been a clue and a perpetual interest to those
who follow the intricacies of Wessex geography, in spite of Mr. Hardy’s
half-discouragement of those who sought to localise the horizons and
landscapes of his “merely realistic dream country.”

His “illuminative surnames” have been spoken of by some writers. His
place-names are no less illuminative, and his quaint or sonorous
substitutes might be transferred to the map of Dorset with little loss.
In some cases an older name is revived, such as Shaston, Middleton
Abbey, and Kingsbere. Sometimes he has made a slight modification of
the real name, or received a suggestion from it, as in Sherton Abbas,
Emminster, Port Bredy, Chaseborough, Casterbridge. Other names are
downright inventions, often a _précis_ of the natural features of the
town, such as Aldbrickham for Reading; or made with a fine ear for
local probability.[79]

[Illustration: MR. THOMAS HARDY.]

The county town of Dorset, with its core of old houses, and too many
that are new, is the centre of the Hardy district, as it is the “pole,
focus, or nerve-knot,” of the surrounding country. Its memories of
Rome are preserved in Mr. Hardy’s name for it, “Casterbridge”; and
its outward appearance in the days when Dorchester had no suburbs,
and was “compact as a box of dominoes” behind its stockade of limes
and chestnuts. A description of the old-fashioned place, in the mouth
of one of Mr. Hardy’s characters, always quoted in the guide-books to
Dorchester, is that “it is huddled all together, and it is shut in by a
square wall of trees like a plot of garden-ground by a box edging”; and
the unusual way the country came up to the town and met in one line
is best described in his words:—

 The farmer’s boy could sit under his barley mow and pitch a stone into
 the office window of the town clerk; reapers at work among the sheaves
 nodded to acquaintances standing on the pavement corner; the red-robed
 judge, when he condemned a sheep-stealer, pronounced sentence to the
 tune of Baa, that floated in at the window from the remainder of the
 flock browsing hard by; and at executions the waiting crowd stood in
 a meadow immediately before the drop, out of which the cows had been
 temporarily driven to give the spectators room.

It has been said that the Dorchester in the Wessex novels had no
suburbs; the North Street ended abruptly in a mill by the river; the
South Street came to an end in a cornfield—but these bounds have been
leaped over in several places, and to-day the east, or Fordington side
of the town (Mr. Hardy’s Durnover) alone remains unchanged; and here
the flat water-meadows stretch up to the garden-hedges and the actual
walls of the houses. In spite of changes without the escarpments, the
curfew still sounds at the stroke of eight from St. Peter’s with its
“peremptory clang,” the signal for shop-shutting throughout the town.
The brick bridge over the Frome, and the stone bridge over a branch of
the same stream in the meads, have their well-defined peculiarities
in Dorchester as in “Casterbridge.” The neighbourhood of “Mixen”
Lane (Mill Lane), the “mildewed leaf” in the sturdy and flourishing
Casterbridge plant, is recognisable at the east end of the town, near
the town bridges.

Lucetta’s house, “High Place Hall,” at the corner of Durngate Street,
has a modern shop-front inserted; while the most significant feature
of her house is to be found at Colyton House, where, in the centre
of the wall flanking the garden, is an archway, now bricked up,
surmounted by a battered mask in which the open-mouthed, comic leer can
hardly be discerned to-day. Without the town, on the Weymouth Road,
is the immense Roman “Ring”—“Maumbury Ring, melancholy, lonely, yet
accessible from every part of the town”—which was to Dorchester what
the ruined Colosseum is to modern Rome.

“Some old people said that at certain moments in the summer time, in
broad daylight, persons sitting with a book, or dozing in the arena,
had, on lifting their eyes, beheld the slopes lined with a gazing
legion of Hadrian’s soldiery as if watching the gladiatorial combat,
and had heard the roar of their excited voices; that the scene would
remain but a moment, like a lightning flash, and then disappear.” The
ancient square earthwork where Henchard planned his entertainment is
Poundbury Camp, where the annual sheep-fair is held—“Square Pommerie”
of the poems.

Dorchester is interesting from the fact that it is the only full-length
portrait of a town drawn in the Wessex novels, and is the almost
unshifting scene of one, the _Mayor of Casterbridge_, where the
dramatic unity of place is preserved. In other novels the characters
are wanderers and the scenes shifted; or the towns and villages are
sketched in half-lengths or in small thumbnail sketches. Of these,
certainly the most important historically is Shaftesbury, the Shaston
of the novels, which seems to be set upon “a dominant cape or a
far-venturing headland.” It is a town of shrunken importance, “familiar
with forgotten years,” the ancient British Palladour, “which was, and
is, in itself, the city of a dream.”

The houses now composing Shaftesbury are held high up above the Vale
of Blackmore by the height, or cliff, upon which it is built; and
Barnes, no less than Mr. Hardy, was alive to the vision of the old city
on watch, straining her eyes to Blackmore’s “blue-hilled plain,” or
shining “so bright” to those down miles below in the Vale.

Another ancient, shrunken town is Wareham, which reminds one to a
certain extent of Dorchester, for it is square, ramparted, and defended
by water on one side; but these are the only points of resemblance. The
little diminished town “where only the presence of the river and the
shallow barges on its bosom suggest the ocean,” goes by the name of
“Anglebury”[80] in the Wessex novels, for it was a noted town in the
Saxon age, when it was a place of strength. Sherborne, the “Sherton
Abbas” of the novels, takes its fictitious name, like many other Wessex
towns, from its most prominent feature, the Abbey. Cerne Abbas—called
“Abbot’s Cernel” in the novels, one of its old names being Cernel—is a
village “still loitering in a mediæval atmosphere”; while Bere Regis,
which appears in the novels under the older form, “Kingsbere,” is
another of the diminished places that Mr. Hardy delights to honour, a
“blinking little one-eyed place” of thatched cottages, the measure of
whose earlier magnificence is the fine church of St. John the Baptist
that holds the dust of the Turbervilles. “Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill,” to
give it its full Wessex title, owes the last limb of that compound name
to Woodbury Hill (Greenhill)—a green hill partly covered with trees
that overlooks Bere. Its ancient fair, now much decayed, is described
rather as it was than as it is, as the “Nijni-Novgorod of South
Wessex.” The fair is, however, still held in September, beginning on
the eighteenth of the month. “Marlott,” really Marnhull, also connected
with _Tess of the D’Urbervilles_, lies embedded in Blackmore Vale,
“where the fields are never brown and the springs never dry,” between
Sturminster and Shaftesbury.

Some six miles distant from Mr. Hardy’s home is the village of
Piddletown, known by the name of Weatherbury in _Far from the Madding
Crowd_. The church described there remains, but, as the novelist
expressly warns us, “Warren’s Malthouse” disappeared years ago, with
some of the village’s characteristic peculiarities.

Stinsford, a parish of which the Bockhamptons are hamlets, the original
of “Mellstock,” is so carefully described by Mr. Hardy that each
cottage might well be a literary landmark, while Sutton Poyntz, the
“Overcombe” of _The Trumpet-Major_, like Piddletown, has lost one of
Mr. Hardy’s landmarks, for the mill is demolished, but the colossal
figure of George III. upon the chalk downs, which in the novel was
being cut, is still to be seen.

Mr. Hardy’s special quality of precision that comes of knowledge is
nowhere more closely shown than in his pictures of great houses, or,
indeed, of buildings of any kind. They are all drawn from the real,
from their cellars and foundations to their leads and chimney-pots.
The only liberty he takes with the originals is to remove them, in
one or two cases, to another position. For instance, Lower Waterstone
Farm, the original of Bathsheba Everdene’s house in _Far from the
Madding Crowd_—“a hoary building of the Jacobean stage of classic
Renaissance”—is nearly two miles from “Weatherbury” (Piddletown).
Again, Poxwell Hall, the “Oxwell Hall” of _The Trumpet-Major_, is
really three miles from “Overcombe” (Sutton Poyntz), and, therefore,
not the close neighbour of the Lovedays it is made to be. The original
of “Welland House” is Charborough; but the “Tower,” as Mr. Hardy
writes, “had two or three originals—Horton, Charborough, etc.”

Wool Manor-house, or “Well Bridge,” as Mr. Hardy, reverting to the
older name, calls it, once a possession of the Turbervilles, is set on
the bank of the rush-grown Frome, near the great Elizabethan bridge
that gives the place half its name. The paintings of two women are
actually, as in the novel, on the walls of the staircase, but they
are now rapidly fading away, and can only with difficulty be made out
to-day by the light of a candle.

“Enkworth Court” (Encombe), deep in the Glen of Encombe, approached by
a long road gradually dropping into the cup-like crater by the only
expedient of winding round it, is a “house in which Pugin would have
torn his hair.” “Great Hintock House,” however, another house in a
hole, has no original, though it has somewhat hastily been identified
with Turnworth House, near Blandford. The situation is similar, but
Turnworth House is largely a modern building, while the “Great Hintock
House” of _The Woodlanders_ had a front which was an “ordinary manorial
presentation of Elizabethan windows, mullioned and hooded, worked in
rich snuff-coloured free-stone from local quarries.”

The sea-coast towns of Dorset, southern outposts of Wessex, make
an occasional appearance in the novels and tales. The original of
“Knollsea” is Swanage, which would scarcely now be described as the
sea-side village “lying snug within its two headlands as between a
finger and thumb.” With Bridport (“Port Bredy”) and its neighbour,
West Bay, Mr. Hardy takes one of his rare liberties in altering
the configuration of the country; for one story opens with the
statement that “the shepherd on the east hill could shout out lambing
intelligence to the shepherd on the west hill,” over the intervening
chimneys. The cleft, however, in which the town is sunk is not so
exiguous.

Georgian Weymouth is peculiarly the scene of _The Trumpet-Major_; while
Portland, “the Isle of Slingers”—

                The Isle of the Race
  Many-caverned, bald, wrinkled of face,

—is especially the district of _The Well Beloved_. It is a “wild,
herbless, weather-worn promontory,” sour and treeless, with its
beak-like point stretching out like the head of a bird into the English
Channel. On the east side is an unexpected wooded dell, narrow and full
of shade, on the summit of which rises Pennsylvania Castle—“Sylvania
Castle” of the novel—a modern castellated house, built in 1800 for John
Penn, Governor of the Island, who planted the trees around it.

Perhaps Mr. Hardy’s most inalienable possession is not the town but
the wild, the “obscure, obsolete, superseded country,” a “tract in
pain,” which, with one form but many names, stretches from Poole in
the east to almost within sight of Dorchester on the west, from near
Bere Regis in the north to Winfrith in the south, where it joins the
heathland of the Isle of Purbeck. Though “Egdon” Heath is broken up
into many tracts, into Morden and Bere, and Wool and Duddle and other
heaths, it has an essential unity, and the attempts at cultivation have
met with desperate and, as it were, voluntary resistance, so that the
breaks into green strips of cornfield slip the memory on a back-look
at that lonely land. It is a place inviolate and “unaltered as the
stars,” a sweep of moorland, a tract of land covered with heather and
bracken and furze, practically unbroken, where, “with the exception
of an aged highway, and a still more aged barrow, themselves almost
crystallized to natural products by long continuance, even the trifling
irregularities were not caused by pick-axe, plough, or spade, but
remained as the very finger-touches of the last geological change.” In
appearance its colours are by distance blended into the purple brown
called, in _The Return of the Native_, “swart”—its “antique brown
dress.” The swart, abrupt slopes appear to be “now rising into natural
hillocks masquerading solemnly as sepulchral tumuli, now dipping into
hollows, where the rain-water collects in marshy pools and keeps green
the croziers and fully-opened fronds of the bracken much longer than
the parched growths at the crests of these rises, and again spreading
out into little scrubby plains.”[81]

Its quality is “prodigious, and so as to frighten one to be in it all
alone at night,” as Pepys said of another solitary place—the great
earthwork of Old Sarum. In Mr. Hardy’s words, “the face of the heath
by its mere complexion adds half an hour to evening: it can, in like
manner, retard the dawn, sadden noon, anticipate the frowning of storms
scarcely generated, and intensify the opacity of a moonless midnight
to a cause of shaking and dread.” It is an agent among agents, and
what Wordsworth finds that nature becomes seen by man’s intellect,
“an ebbing and a flowing mind.” Its lonely face, and the face of all
solitary heath-lands, are interpreted for ever in _The Return of the
Native_.

[Illustration: CAME RECTORY.
_The home of William Barnes._]



