THE STORY OF “JOHN DORY.”


This very old song commemorates the brave doings of the “Fowey
Gallants,” as the mariners of that wonderful old-world Cornish seaport
were called. They were men, famous throughout the middle ages, as the
boldest and most daring of sea fighters.

It possibly has reference to some heroic action fought in Edward III’s
reign, when Fowey’s contribution to the King’s fleet is said to have
been 47 ships and 770 men.

The song itself was perhaps written a hundred years later than this,
but it is certain that in Tudor times it was one of the most popular
songs in the land, so well known in the West that Richard Carew in his
“Survey of Cornwall,” published in 1602, refers to it in his account of
Fowey, and calls it old then.

He says: “Moreover the prowess of one Nicholas, son of a widow, near
Foy, is descanted upon in an old three man’s song, namely, how he
fought bravely at sea, with John Dory (a Genowey, as I conjecture), set
forth by John the French King, and (after much bloodshed on both sides)
took and slew him, in revenge of the great ravine (_see Transcriber’s
Note_) and cruelty which he had forecommitted upon the Englishmen’s
goods and bodies.”

Carew’s assumption is that John Dory was a Genoese employed by the
French King.

Many writers of the 16th and 17th centuries spoke of the song; Dryden
described it as one of the most popular in his time. But gradually it
came to be forgotten as songs in praise of newer heroes arose.

But at any rate we can take it that “Nicholl’s” feat was no ordinary
one, for he came of a race that loved fighting. The Fowey mariners were
always ready for a sea fight, engaging in a little private piracy when
legitimate warfare was not available. And they took their full share in
the struggles against the Armada, and late against the Dutch admiral De
Ruyter.

Fowey--Q’s “Troy Town”--has seen as stirring a life as any of our
seaport towns. It is still a busy, picturesque little place, straggling
along the edge of its beautiful sheltered harbour, at the mouth of
which remains of its ancient castle-fort still stand.

It is a fascinating place in which to spend a holiday, warm and
sheltered, with excellent opportunities for sailing or sea or river
fishing; and its neighbourhood abounds in pleasant walks and places of
interest.

[Music and score: “JOHN DORY”]

Verse 1.

    1st MAN. As it fell on a ho-ly day, And up-on a ho-ly tide-a,
    John Do-ry bought him an am-bling nag, To Pa-ris for to ride-a,
    To Pa-ris for to ride-a, And up-on a ho-ly tide.----
    As it fell on a ho-ly day, And up-on a ho-ly tide-a,
    John Do-ry bought him an am-bling nag, To Pa-ris for to ride-a.

    2nd MAN. As it fell on a ho-ly day, And up-on a ho-ly tide-a,
    John Do-ry bought him an am-bling nag, To Pa-ris for to ride-a,
    To Pa-ris for to ride-a, And up-on a ho-ly tide.----
    As It fell on a ho-ly day, And up-on a ho-ly tide-a.

    3rd MAN. As it fell on a ho-ly day, And up-on a ho-ly tide-a,
    John Do-ry bought him an am-bling nag, To Pa-ris for to ride-a,
    To Pa-ris for to ride-a, And up-on a ho-ly tide.----

       *       *       *       *       *

    The first man that John Dory did meet; was good King John of France-a
    John Dory could well of his courtesie, but fell down in a trance-a;
      But fell down in a trance-a at good King John of France.

    “A pardon, a pardon, my liege and my King, for my merie men and me-a,
    And all the churles in merie England, I’ll bring them bound to thee-a,
      I’ll bring them bound to thee-a, my merie men and me.”

    And Nicholl was then a Cornish man, a little beside Bohyde-a;
    And he manned forth a good black bark, with fifty good oars on a
          side-a,
      With fifty good oars on a side-a, and he dwelt beside Bohyde.

    The roaring cannons then were plied, and dub-a-dub went the drum-a;
    The braying trumpets loud they cried, to courage both all and some-a,
      To courage both all and some-a, and dub-a-dub went the drum.

    The grappling-hooks were brought at length, the brown bill and the
          sword-a;
    John Dory at length, for all his strength, was clapt fast under
          board-a,
      Was clapt fast under board-a, by the brown bill and the sword.

  NOTE.--The “1st Man” should be he of the loudest voice of the three;
        the others should so restrain themselves that the words of each
        verse may be clearly heard.
