THE CASE OF A HAUNTED HOUSE IN RED LION SQUARE


I am not a psychometrist--at least not to any great extent. I cannot
pick up a small object--say an old ring or coin--and straightway tell
you its history, describing all the people and incidents with which it
has been associated. Yet, occasionally, odd things are revealed to me
through some strange ornament or piece of furniture.

The other day I went to see a friend, who was staying in a flat near
Sloane Square, and I was much impressed by a chair that stood on the
hearthrug near the fire. Now I am not a connoisseur of chairs; I cannot
always ascribe dates to them. I can, of course, tell whether they are
oak or mahogany, Chippendale or Sheraton, but that is about all. It was
not, however, the make or the shape of this chair that attracted me,
it was the impression I had that something very uncanny was seated
on it. My friend, noticing that I looked at it very intently, said:
"I will tell you something very interesting about that chair. It came
from a haunted house in Red Lion Square. I bought it at a sale there,
and several people who have sat in it since have had very curious
experiences. I won't tell you them till after you've tried it. Sit in
it."

"That wouldn't be any good," I answered; "you know I can't
psychometrise, especially to order. May I take it home with me for a
few nights?"

My friend smilingly assented.

The chair was put in a taxi, and in less than half an hour was safely
lodged in my chambers. I was living alone just then, for my wife had
been suddenly called away to the country, to the bedside of an aged
and ailing relative. I say alone, but I had company--a lady tabby
that, apparently abandoned by her lover, persisted in showering
her attentions upon me. For hours at a time she would perch on the
writing-table in my bedroom, whilst I was at work, and fix me amorously
with her big green eyes.

The moment, however, this most eccentric of feline beauties perceived
the chair, she sprang off her pedestal and dived under the bed;
and from that hour to this I have never seen her. The chair did
not frighten me, but it brought a new, and I cannot say altogether
pleasant, atmosphere into the place. When I was in bed and the gas
was out, I could swear the chair moved, that it shifted nearer and
nearer the window--always the window, as if it was most anxious to
make its escape and hie back to its old home. And again there were
times when, barred from this avenue of escape, it rocked. Yes, I could
distinctly hear it rock backwards and forwards on the parquet floor
with ever increasing rapidity and violence, as though blind with fury
at being balked. And then, again, it groaned, groaned in the deepest
and most hopeless misery--misery that the eternally damned alone can
know and suffer. Certain now that there was something there that badly
needed human consolation, I addressed the chair, and, failing to get
any verbal answer from it, I tried a code of raps. That failing, I sat
in it for several hours two successive nights, and experimented in
automatic writing. The result was nil. Resolving to give it another
trial, but this time without a planchette, I chose a Friday night
when the moon was in the crescent, and placing the chair on one side
the hearth, facing the window, I threw myself back in it and closed
my eyes. For some minutes I was still vividly conscious of the old
surroundings: the flickering fire flames--seen through my closed lids;
the old grandfather clock on the landing outside solemnly ticking; the
eternal whistling and hooting of the taxis as they whizzed along in the
street beneath.

Then by degrees, quite imperceptibly, I lost cognisance of all these
things; and, intuitively, I began to feel the presence of something
strange and wholly novel in the room. I felt it steal forth from a
piece of dark and ancient tapestry my wife had hung on the wall. It was
merely a shadow, an undefined shadow, a shadow such as the moon, when
very low in the heavens, might possibly fashion from the figure of a
man; but yet it was not a man, nor a woman, nor anything with which I
was in any way familiar. For a moment it stood still, watching me from
its vague, formless, indefinite eyes. Then it made a forward movement,
stood still again, and yet once again advanced.

Coming up behind my chair, it bent low over me, and placing its
long, cool spirit hands over my eyelids, imparted to me a steadily
increasing sense of numbness. All thought was gradually annihilated;
it was succeeded by a blank, just such a blank as suddenly comes to
one when in the hands of the anæsthetist. Now, up to this evening,
I had presumed, as nearly everybody does presume, that, in the case
of mental blanks, every particle of consciousness is lost, totally
arrested, and held, for the time being, in complete subjection. But
on this occasion--at the very moment memory reasserted itself--I had
recollections of some great metempsychosis, some stupendous change in
my entire constitution, a change that affected all that we term mind,
and spirit, and soul.

I struggled earnestly and desperately to recall the exact nature and
process of that change, which I now believe underlies all so-called
blanks, and I achieved this much: I recalled travel--a mad, rushing
plunge or descent into something--something quite different from
anything I had known before--a descent into some plane, or sphere, or
condition, wholly and completely apart from the physical, and what is
generally understood and classified as the mental plane, sphere, or
condition. In my efforts to recollect, I have arrived at that same
pitch since; but whenever I have been on the verge of getting beyond
it, of forcing back a minute recollection of how that metempsychosis
was enacted, of all the stages in it, there has been a lapse--my memory
has dimmed. Yet brief and slight as these remembrances have been, they
have assured me of one great truth, namely--that the state of blank
never actually exists. Some part of us--the part that alone retains
consciousness--is extracted and borne far away from the actual material
body; but on its return, on its reunion with the physical--with our
gross and carnal, earthly self--all memory of this delicate and finely
poised consciousness is at once swallowed up and obliterated. If such
were not the case, if everything were indeed a blank, and the spiritual
as well as the material part of us were suspended during what we term
unconsciousness, we should be forced to the conclusion that the soul
has no separate existence, that it cannot survive the body, and that
the immortality of man, the infinite perpetuation of our identity, in
which we have so fondly believed, is but a chimera. I am, however,
certain--I could, if need be, swear to it--that even in the deepest
slumber, in the wildest delirium, in the most seemingly omnipotent
and annihilating blank, all is not lost, something remains, and that
something is the psychic and spiritual consciousness, the very thing
that constitutes what we term soul. In the first stage, then, of my
cognisance of thought, again I struggled with memory, and the struggle
overcoming me, I gradually lapsed into the mere consciousness of
existence without thought. How long this condition lasted I cannot
say, but with startling abruptness thought returned, and I became
madly anxious to ascertain my present state--how it differed from my
former--and my whereabouts. I was conscious of sound and light and
motion, but conscious of them merely from the point of observation,
as things quite outside myself--things that in no way sensibly
affected me. What particularly impressed me was the silence--the
passivity--of what, I believed, constituted my body. I could detect
no heart movement, no pulsation whatever. I seemed to be there--to
have a very familiar form--but to be nothing more than form--to have
no tangibility. So far my eyes had seen; but, purposely, I had not
allowed myself to discriminate objects. I was intuitively certain my
power of vision had become supernormal; and I dreaded to employ it for
fear I should see too much--too acutely. I had a stupendous sense of
impending horror. At length, however, I was impelled by an irresistible
fascination to look. I did so, and in an instant became the spectator
of a drama. Before me, seated at a grimy wooden table, were two men,
clad in the fascinating garb of the latter part of the eighteenth
century--long coat, befrilled vest, knee breeches, and peruke. Two mugs
of ale were placed in front of them, and the one man kept on sipping,
while the other, seldom touching the ale, took long and vigorous puffs
at a pipe. The room had a very low ceiling, blackened with smoke, and
traversed by enormous oaken beams; a chimney corner, in which sat an
old man, munching something out of a very dirty-looking bag, and, at
the same time, taking occasional pinches of snuff; and a couch, stowed
away in one corner, and piled several feet high with a variety of
books, papers, cushions, and wearing apparel.

The general atmosphere of the place suggested an inn or tavern. It was
with the two men in the foreground, however, that something told me
I was most concerned. They appeared to be about the same age and of
the same class; but there all similarity ended. The one was tall and
thin, with dark, deep-set, and very restless eyes--and oddly noticeable
hands. They were large and sinewy, with peculiarly long fingers and
protruding knuckles. His companion was small and shrivelled, with
watery blue eyes and a particularly weak mouth.

"Strange we should meet like this, John," the shorter of the two
remarked, taking a big gulp of ale. "Ten years since we last saw one
another, and that was in Bristol. Do you recollect the occasion?"

"Do I recollect it?" the other responded. "Can I ever forget it? You
had just come from her. She had accepted you. Money, of course. I had
nothing to offer her but love. Love! What's the good of love without
prospects?"

"It was a fair fight, John."

"Fair fight, Wilfred!" John replied. "You may call it fair, if you
like, but I don't. What chance had I when you pointed to your bank-book
and said, 'If I die I can settle all that on her'? I could promise
nothing. I hadn't a cent in the world beyond my weekly pay. Thirty
shillings. And how pleased you were with yourself when you came to see
me that last evening in Bristol. Do you remember what you said? 'It's
the fortune of war, my boy. You'll soon get over it. Work.' As if I
didn't work! But I took your advice, though I hated you for it; and I
left Bristol. After what had happened I loathed the place. An uncle of
mine offered me a clerkship in his office in Holborn, and I stuck so
hard to my job that I eventually became a partner."

"Then you're a rich man, John?"

"Comfortable, but not rich, Wilfred."

"And you've forgiven me? Got over that little love affair, eh?
Well, well. Matrimony is not all bliss, John. At least that was my
experience. Poor Jenny! But of course I have not told you. I'm much to
be pitied, John."

"She's dead!"

"She is," Wilfred said, filling his mug with ale and raising it to his
lips, "and I'm a lonely widower. But how did you know?"

"You wouldn't believe me if I told you," John replied. "I get my
information through channels that are barred to men like you."

"Witchcraft, I suppose," Wilfred said, with a sneer. "But why this
mystery? Someone in Bristol city wrote to you."

"No, they didn't," John answered. "I know no one in Bristol city now.
Your first suggestion was nearer the truth. Your wife, Wilfred, often
comes to see me. I know all about the way in which you treated her."

"The way in which I treated her!" Wilfred cried, starting upright in
his chair, his face flushing angrily. "God's truth, man, what do you
mean by such a statement?"

"I mean exactly what I say," John answered. "For the first two years
you treated her tolerably well. Then someone else caught your fancy.
Jenny was neglected, despised, and on one occasion actually beaten."

"It's a lie!" Wilfred gasped, springing to his feet, as if to leave the
table.

"No, it's not," John retorted, "and you know it. Come, sit down, man,
and go on drinking. Love never was in your line, drink is. Besides,
as you say, she's dead, and what's the use of quarrelling over a
corpse, even though she were beautiful as--as----" He didn't finish his
sentence, but leaning forward thrust Wilfred back into his chair.

For some seconds the two men sat and looked at one another--Wilfred
sullen, frightened, and resentful; John imperturbable save for the
perpetual restless movement of his eyes, and an occasional peculiar
twitching of his upper lip and hands.

"A rum," John said at length, "or a gin? Or both?"

"Rum."

"Very good, let it be rum." He called the waiter, and a rum was served.

"You're not drinking to-day, John," Wilfred remarked, taking a long
pull at the rum and looking more amiable.

"No, I'm quite off spirits," John replied--"at least, spirits of that
kind."

"Spirits of that kind!" Wilfred sniggered. "Why, whatever other kind of
spirits are there? What a mysterious fellow you are, John."

"Am I?" John laughed. "Perhaps I've reason to be. I live in a big
house, all alone, in Red Lion Square."

"New houses, aren't they?" Wilfred commented. "And big rents?"

John nodded, the same nod answering apparently both questions.

"But you haven't told me yet," Wilfred went on, "how you knew Jenny was
dead."

"I've seen her," John said very quietly. "She comes to me regularly."

"Seen her? Comes to you regularly? You must be mad, John--mad or
hoaxing. How can you see her, and why should she come to you?"

John shrugged his shoulders.

"I told you you wouldn't believe me," he replied. "No one does. Yet I
can swear to you it's true. She appeared to me last night and told me
you would be here this afternoon. That is how I happened to meet you."

"You overwork yourself, John," Wilfred said, taking another long pull
at the rum. "Too much work is just as harmful to one's temperament
and chances in life as too little. Moderation, my boy, moderation, I
say. That's always been my keynote. I should like to see this house of
yours."

"You shall," John said, "and the spirits. Not hers--I don't think
you will see hers--but the rum and brandy. I've excellent brands of
both--smuggled over from abroad last week."

"And yet you don't drink!"

"No, I got them in entirely for your benefit. Come. We will go to my
house. It's more comfortable than here. A big fire, nice easy chairs,
tobacco, and bottles--bottles with plenty in them."

"And you've forgiven me, John?"

"Forgiven you!" John replied, rising from the table and putting on his
hat. "Forgiven you! Do you think I should ask you round to my house, to
drink the best vintage London can offer you, if I hadn't? Come. Come
along at once."

Wilfred rose with some difficulty from his seat, and the two men went
out into the street. The scene then changed, and I found myself in a
big, gloomy house, following them up a long flight of wooden stairs.

The moment I entered the house I became the victim of an anomalous
species of fear. I saw nothing, but I instinctively knew that strange,
indefinable presences were there, watching us with sphinx-like faces.
I felt them, standing in the doorways, lurking in the angles of the
hall and landings, and peering down at us from over the balustrades.
I felt that they were merely critical at present, merely deliberating
what attitude they should adopt towards us; and I felt that the whole
atmosphere of the house was impregnated with a sense of the utmost
mystery--a mystery soluble only to those belonging, in the truest
sense, to the spirit world--Neutrarians--spirit entities generated
solely from spirit essence and never incarcerated in any material
body--spirits initiated into one and all of the idiosyncrasies of
spirit land. The man John gave no outward signs of being in any way
affected by these presences; but it was otherwise with Wilfred. The
silence and darkness of the house unmistakably disturbed him, and as
he panted up the staircase, following his long and lean host with
none too steady a step, he cast continual looks of apprehension about
him. First, I saw him peer over his shoulders, down the stairs behind
him, as if he fancied something, to which he could apply no name,
might be treading softly at his heels; then I watched his eyes wander
nervously to the gloomy space overhead; and then, as if drawn by some
extremely unwelcome magnet, to the great, white, sinewy hands of John.
Arriving on the second floor, they crossed a broad landing and entered
a spacious room, which was fitfully illuminated by a few dying embers
in a large open grate. John produced a tinder box, lighted a trio of
tall wax candles, and resuscitated the fire. He then left the room,
reappearing in a few minutes with an armload of bottles.

"Make yourself comfortable, Wilfred," he said. "Take that easy chair
and pull it up in front of the fire. Rum or brandy?"

Wilfred, whose eyes glittered at the sight of the spirits, chose rum.
"I'll have a little brandy afterwards," he said, "just to wash down the
rum. Moderation is my password, John, everything in moderation," and,
helping himself to the rum, he laughed. John sat opposite him, and I
noticed, not without some emotion, that the chair he took was the exact
counterpart of the one in which I had left my material ego.

"John," Wilfred exclaimed after a while, "this house is most
extraordinarily still. I--I don't like such stillness----" He was more
than half drunk. "Why do you live alone? Damned silly habit to live
alone in a house like this." Then he swallowed a big gulp of rum and
leered.

"All habits are silly," John replied. "All life is silly. Death alone
is sensible. Death's a fine thing."

Then there was a pause; and a gust of wind, blowing up the staircase,
set the door jarring and made the windows rattle.

"I don't like that remark of yours, John," Wilfred suddenly stuttered.
"Death's a fine thing?--Death's the work of the devil. It's the only
thing I fear. And the--the wind. What's that?"

From the hall below there came a gentle slam, the soft closing of a
door.

John shrugged his shoulders and stirred the logs until they gave out a
big blaze.

"It's a noise," he said. "This house is full of noises. Every house is
full of noises, if only you take the trouble to listen for them."

Another pause, and Wilfred helped himself to some brandy.

"Noises, like women," he said, "want keeping in their places. They've
no business wandering about on nights like this. Hark!"

The faintest sound possible broke the stillness of the house; but it
suggested much. To me it was like a light, bounding footfall on the
first flight of stairs, those nearest the hall.

After listening a moment John spoke. "It's only Jenny," he said; "at
least, I fancy it's only Jenny. But there are others. God alone knows
whence they come or why. The house at times is full of them. So far I
have only felt their presence--and heard. Pray to Heaven I may never
see them--at least, not some. Do you hear that?"

There was a gentle rustling on the landing, a swishing, such as might
have been caused by someone in a silk dress with a long train.

"It is--it's Jenny!" John went on. "I told you--she comes every night."

Wilfred made no reply, but the hand that held the glass shook so much
that the brandy ran over and splashed on the floor.

There was again silence, then a creak, the faint but very unmistakable
turning of a door handle.

Wilfred's face blanched. He tried to look round, but dared not.

"I'm afraid too," John murmured, his teeth slightly chattering. "I
never can get over my initial terror when she first arrives. God! What
horror I have known since I lived here."

The latch of the door gave a click, the sort of click it always gives
when the door springs open, and a current of icy air blew across the
room and fanned the cheeks of both men. Wilfred attempted to speak, but
his voice died away in his throat. He glanced at the window. It was
closed with heavy wooden shutters.

"It's no use," John sighed, "there's no escape that way. Make up your
mind to face it--face HER. Ah!" He sank back as he spoke and closed his
eyes.

I looked at Wilfred. His vertebrae had totally collapsed; he sat all
huddled up in his chair, his weak, watery eyes bulging with terror, and
the brandy trickling down his chin on to his cravat. All this scene, I
must tell you, was to me most vivid, most acutely vivid, although I was
but a passive participator in it. The same feeling that had possessed
me on my entrance into the house was with me even in a greater measure
now. I felt that pressing on the heels of this wind, this icy blast of
air, were the things from the halls and landings, the distractingly
enigmatical and ever-deliberating things. I felt them come crowding
into the room; felt them once again watching. Something now seemed to
go wrong with the wicks of all three candles; they burned very low,
and the feeble, flickering light they emitted was of a peculiar bluish
white. While I was engaged in pondering over this phenomenon my eye
caught a sudden movement in the room, and I saw what looked like a
cylindrical pillar of mist sweep across the floor and halt behind John.
It remained standing at the back of his chair for a second or so, and
then, retracing its way across the floor, disappeared through the door,
which, opening wide to meet it, closed again with a loud bang. John
opened his eyes and reaching forward poured himself out some brandy.

"I told you I didn't drink spirits," he said, "but her visit to-night
has made a difference. Come, Wilfred, pull yourself together. The
ghosts--at least her ghost has gone; and as for the others, well,
they don't count. Even you may get used to them in time. Come, come,
be a man. For a sceptic, a confirmed sceptic, I never saw anyone so
frightened."

Appealed to thus, Wilfred slowly straightened himself out, and peeping
round furtively at the door, as if to make sure it really was shut, he
helped himself to some more brandy. John leaned forward and regarded
him earnestly. After some minutes Wilfred spoke.

"Those candles," he said, "why don't they burn properly? I have never
seen candles behave in that fashion before. John, I don't like this
house."

John laughed. "Matter of taste and habit," he said. "I didn't like it
at first, but I like it now."

Another pause, and then John said suddenly, "More brandy, Wilfred?"

"No, I've had enough," Wilfred replied, "enough. John, I must be going
home. See me to the door, John; the front door, I mean, John. See me to
the door, there's a good fellow." He tried to rise, but John put out
one hand and pushed him gently back into his seat.

"It's early yet," John said, "far too early to go home. Think what a
long time it is since we last met. Ten whole years. To some people
almost a lifetime. Are you tired of life, Wilfred?"

"Tired of life?" Wilfred echoed. "Tired of brandy, perhaps, but not of
life. What a question to ask! Why?" And again glancing furtively at the
door he tried to rise.

Once more John put out his hand and thrust him back. "Not yet," he
said; "the hour is far too early. What were we talking about? Being
tired of life. Of course you are not. How foolish of me to ask you such
a thing! You who are so rich, respected, admired, beloved. You are
happy in spite of your sad bereavement. You are a man to be missed.
With me it is otherwise. I long to go to the spirit land, for it is
there only I have friends, really genuine, loving friends. I am not
afraid to die. I want death. I yearn for it. Yearn for it, Wilfred."

"Spirits! Death! Always spirits and death in your company," Wilfred
responded. "Let's talk of something else--something more cheerful. I
want cheering, John. This house of yours is depressing--most horribly
depressing. You say it is new?"

"Comparatively new," John replied, and he started fumbling in his vest
pocket.

"Comparatively new," Wilfred repeated, his eyes watching John's fingers
attentively,--"and it has ghosts. Why, I thought it was only old houses
that were haunted."

John chuckled. "So people say," he replied, "and they tell me I am mad
to think there are ghosts here. They say it is impossible. What is your
opinion, Wilfred?"

"Why," Wilfred said, watching John's movements with increasing
interest, "that's my opinion too. A house to be haunted must have a
history. And this house has none, has it? John!" The last syllable was
uttered in an altogether different tone. It was not the voice of a
drunken man.

For a brief moment John hesitated, trembled. He seemed to be in the
throes of some great mental strain, some acute psychological crisis.
But he speedily overcame it, and drawing his hand out suddenly from his
vest, he produced a huge, murderous-looking clasp knife.

"True!" he said, "true. So far this house has no history. No history
whatever. But it will have one, Wilfred. It will." And baring the blade
of his formidable weapon, he crouched low and crept forward.

       *       *       *       *       *