
It was also during my engagement at the Mercury that I heard of a
haunting at the Lombard. This theatre, it appears, has a ghostly
visitant in the form of a particularly malevolent-looking clown.

According to one report, a lady and her daughter--Mrs. and Miss
Dawkins--occupied box 3 one January night during the run of an
exceedingly pretty modern version of _Cinderella_.

The lights were down and all eyes were focused on Cinderella, one of
the prettiest and daintiest little actresses in London, dressed in pink
and sitting before a very realistic make-belief of a kitchen fire,
when Miss Dawkins, who had her elbows resting on the balustrade and
was leaning well forward, heard a faint ejaculation from close beside
her. Fearing lest her mother was ill, she turned sharply round, and was
somewhat surprised to see that Mrs. Dawkins had left her seat and was
leaning against the wall of the box with her arms folded and a most
satirical smile on her face. Both the attitude and the expression were
so entirely novel that Miss Dawkins could only conclude that her mother
had suddenly taken leave of her senses; and she was deliberating what
to do, when a feeling that a sudden metamorphosis was about to take
place held her spellbound. Bit by bit her mother seemed to fade away,
to melt into the background; the dim outline and the general posture
remained, but instead of the actual body and well-known face, she
saw something else gradually begin to form and to usurp their place.
Her mother had very delicate and beautifully shaped hands, but these
vanished, and the hands Miss Dawkins now looked on were large and red
and coarse--horribly coarse. Fearful of what she might see next, but
totally unable to fight against some strange, controlling agency, she
continued to look. First, her eyes rested on a pair of sleeves--white,
baggy, and soiled; then on a broad, deep chest, also clad in white
and decorated in the most fantastic manner conceivable in the centre;
then on a short, immensely thick neck; and then on the face. The shock
she now received was acute. Instinct had prepared her for something
very startling, but for nothing quite so grotesque, nor so wholly
at variance with the general atmosphere of the theatre. It was the
painted, crinkled face of a clown--not a merry, jesting grimaldi, but
a clown of a different type--a clown without a smile--a clown born
and fully trained to his business in Hell. As he stood there glaring
at the footlights, every feature, every atom of his person breathed
out hate--hate of a nature so noxious and intense that it seemed to
Miss Dawkins as if the very air were poisoned by it. Being a devout
Catholic, she at once crossed herself and, although almost powerless
with horror, began to pray. The face then faded till it entirely
disappeared, and Miss Dawkins once again found herself gazing upon the
well-known countenance of her mother.

"Why are you standing?" she asked.

"I am sure I don't know," Mrs. Dawkins replied. "But I don't like this
box. I think there is something very unpleasant about it. I haven't
been myself for the last few minutes. When I was sitting by you just
now, I suddenly became obsessed with a bitter hatred against everyone
on the stage. The very sight of them maddened me. It seemed to me I
had met them all in a former existence and that they had done me some
irreparable injury. I got up and began to plot how I could best get
even with them. Then the idea of setting fire to the theatre seized me.
I had clear visions of a small, dimly lighted room, with which I was
strangely familiar, down below the stage in a dark, draughty basement.
I knew every inch of the place as if I had lived there all my life.
'I will go there,' I said to myself, 'and apply a match. If anyone
sees me, no one will suspect. They will only say, "It's old Tom. He
didn't get the chuck after all. He's come back."' I was repeating the
words 'It's old Tom,' and 'Fire,' when something seemed to strike me
very forcibly on the forehead. This caused me the greatest agony for a
moment. Then you spoke, and I was myself again."

"Would you like to go home?" Miss Dawkins asked anxiously.

"I think I would," was the response. And they went.

Subsequently, a few judicious inquiries elicited no little light on the
matter.

Many years before, an old actor, called Tom Weston, had been employed
annually in pantomime at the Lombard as clown. Like so many of his
profession, however, particularly the older ones, he took to drink;
and he was so often intoxicated on the stage that the management were
at last obliged to dismiss him. He took his dismissal very badly, and
one night, having gone to the theatre in disguise, he was discovered
in the act of setting fire to a room immediately beneath the stage.
In consideration for his many years' service and age, the management
did not prosecute, but recommended his friends to keep him under close
supervision. Tom, however, very soon ceased to cause the management
any anxiety, for, two days after he had attempted, in so diabolical
a manner, to wreak his vengeance on all who had been associated with
him at the theatre, he shot himself dead in his own home. But on every
anniversary of his death, so it is affirmed, he is either seen or
heard, or his presence is in some way demonstrated, in box 3 of the
Lombard Theatre. That his spirit should frequent that particular spot
in the theatre seems to be a fact for which no reason can be assigned.



