
Of course it was a terrible blow to Fitzsimmons, and he told me that if
it had not been for the children he would have committed suicide there
and then. He was devotedly attached to his wife, and the thought that
she no longer cared for him made him yearn to die.

However, Bobbie and Jane were dependent on him, and for their sakes he
determined to go on living.

A week passed--to Fitzsimmons the saddest and dreariest of his
life--and he once again came tramping home in the twilight.

Not troubling now whether he saw the ghost or not, for there was no
one to care whether he was good or bad, or what became of him, he
slouched through the coombe with his long stride more marked and
apparent than usual. On nearing the house and noticing that there was
no bright light, such as he had been accustomed to, in any of the
front windows, but only the feeble flare of the oil lamp over the front
door, a terrible feeling of loneliness came over him. He let himself
in. The hall was in semi-darkness, and he could hear no sounds from the
kitchen. He could see a glimmer of light, however, issuing from under
the kitchen door, and he promptly steered for it. The cook, Agatha, was
sitting in front of the fire, reading a sixpenny novel.

"Why is the house in darkness?" Fitzsimmons asked angrily. "Surely it
is dinner-time."

The cook yawned, and looking up at Fitzsimmons, said: "It's not my
place to light up. It's Rosalie's."

"Where is Rosalie?" Fitzsimmons demanded.

"I don't know," the cook replied. "I can't be expected to know
everything. The cooking's enough for me--at least for the wages I get.
Rosalie's been gone somewhere for the last two hours. I haven't seen or
heard anything of her since tea."

"And the children?" Fitzsimmons inquired.

"Oh, the children's all right," the cook answered--"at least I suppose
so; and, you bet, they'd have let me know fast enough if they hadn't
been. I don't know which of the two hollers loudest."

"Well, get my supper, for mercy's sake, for I'm famishing," Fitzsimmons
said; and he stalked back again into the darkness.

After groping about the hall for some time and knocking over a good
few things, he at length put his hands on a match-box, and lighting
a candle made straight for the nursery. The children had got into
bed partially undressed, and were sound asleep, with their heads
well buried under the bedclothes. Fitzsimmons contrived to uncover
their faces without waking them, and kissing them both lightly on the
forehead, he left them and went downstairs to his study. Here he drew
up a chair close to the fire and, throwing himself into it, prepared
to wait till the gong sounded for supper. A slight noise in the room
made him look round. Across the window recess, from which the sound
apparently came, a pair of heavy red curtains were tightly drawn.
Fitzsimmons rather wondered at this, because Rosalie did not usually
draw the curtains before she lighted up; so he was still looking
at them and wondering, when they were suddenly shaken so violently
that the metal rings made a loud rattling and jarring on the brass
pole to which they were attached. Fitzsimmons watched in breathless
anticipation. Every second he expected to see the curtains part and
some ghoulish face peering out at him. Drawn curtains so often suggest
lurking horrors of that description. Instead, however, the curtains
only grew more and more agitated, shaking violently as if they had the
ague. Then, all of a sudden, they were still. Fitzsimmons rose and was
about to look behind them, when they started trembling again, and the
one nearest the fireplace began to bulge out in the middle. Fitzsimmons
stared at it with a sickening sense of foreboding. At first it had
no definite form, but, very gradually, it assumed a shape, the shape
he felt it would, and moved nearer him. For some seconds he was too
overcome with horror to do anything, but his recollections of what it
had looked like in the coombe that night, and his utter detestation
of it, increased his fear, and in a frenzy of rage he snatched up a
revolver from the mantelpiece and fired at it. Fitzsimmons thinks
it was the bullet that made it suddenly collapse; but I am inclined
to think it was the sound of the report--as sound undoubtedly
does, at times, bring about dematerialisation. There are, I think,
certain sounds that generate vibrations in the air favourable to the
manifestation of spirits, and other sounds that create vibratory motion
destructive to the composition of what are termed ghosts. And here
was an instance of the latter. Fitzsimmons waited for a few minutes,
until he felt sure the thing was gone altogether, entirely quit of the
premises, and then, revolver in hand, pulled aside the curtains.

The next moment he reeled back, stupefied with horror. Lying at full
length on the floor, her white face turned towards him, with a hideous
grin of agony on her lips, was Rosalie.

"Good God!" Fitzsimmons said to himself. "Good God! I've killed her.
What in Heaven's name can I do?"

He deliberated shooting himself; and then the cries of the children,
who had been wakened by the noise, reminding him of his duties to them,
he grew calmer, and telephoned at once for the nearest doctor. The
latter, happening to be at home, was speedily on the spot.

"You say you shot her," he remarked to Fitzsimmons, after he had
examined the body very carefully. "You must be dreaming, sir. There's
not the slightest sign of any bullet. Moreover, the girl's been dead
at least two hours. From the look of her, I should say she died from
strychnine poisoning."

The doctor was right. The girl's death was due to strychnine, and from
the bottle that was found in her possession and a message she scribbled
on the study wall, there is no doubt whatever she committed suicide.
"I was a nice enough girl till I came here," she wrote, "but it's
the coombe that's done it. Mother warned me against it. Coombes make
everyone bad."

After this, Fitzsimmons decided to clear out. Indeed, he could hardly
have done otherwise, for Shane Garth was now placed under a rigorous
ban. Agatha left--she did not even wait till the morning, but cleared
out the same night--and after that it was impossible to get a woman
to come in, even for the day. Consequently, Fitzsimmons had not only
to cook and look after the children, but to do all the packing as
well. At last, however, it was all over, and the carriage stood at the
door, waiting to take him and the children to the station. As he came
downstairs, followed by Bobbie and Jane, someone, he fancied, called
his name. He turned, and Bobbie and Jane turned too.

Bending over the balustrades of the top landing, and looking just like
she had done in her lifetime, save perhaps for the excessive pallor of
her cheeks, and a curious expression of fear and entreaty in her eyes,
was Rosalie.

She faded away as they stared, and close beside the spot where she had
stood, they saw the dim and shadowy outline of a gnarled tree.



