THE SYDERSTONE HAUNTINGS


Some years ago I published in a work entitled _Ghostly Phenomena_
(Werner Laurie & Co.) an account, sent me by the late Rev. Henry
Hacon, M.A., of Searly Vicarage, North Kelsey Moor, of hauntings that
once occurred in the Old Syderstone Parsonage (the present Rectory
has never, so I understand, been in any way disturbed). Thanks to
the kindness and courtesy of Mr. E. A. Spurgin of Temple Balsall,
Warwickshire (grandson of the Rev. John Spurgin), I am now able to
reproduce further correspondence relative to the same case, written at
the time of the occurrence--over eighty years ago.

The following paragraphs appeared in the _Norfolk Chronicle_, June 1,
1833:--

"A REAL GHOST

"The following circumstance has been creating some agitation in the
neighbourhood of Fakenham for the last few weeks.

"In Syderstone Parsonage lives the Rev. Mr. Stewart, curate, and rector
of Thwaite. About six weeks since an unaccountable knocking was heard
in it in the middle of the night. The family became alarmed, not
being able to discover the cause. Since then it has gradually been
becoming more violent, until it has now arrived at such a frightful
pitch that one of the servants has left through absolute terror. The
noises commence almost every morning about two, and continue until
daylight. Sometimes it is a knocking, now in the ceiling overhead,
now in the wall, and now directly under the feet; sometimes it is a
low moaning, which the Rev. Gentleman says reminds him very much of
the moans of a soldier on being whipped; and sometimes it is like the
sounding of brass, the rattling of iron, or the clashing of earthenware
or glass; but nothing in the house is disturbed. It never speaks,
but will beat to a lively tune and moan at a solemn one, especially
at the morning and evening hymns. Every part of the house has been
carefully examined, to see that no one could be secreted, and the doors
and windows are always fastened with the greatest caution. Both the
inside and outside of the house have been carefully examined during
the time of the noises, which always arouse the family from their
slumbers, and oblige them to get up; but nothing has been discovered.
It is heard by everyone present, and several ladies and gentlemen in
the neighbourhood, who, to satisfy themselves, have remained all night
with Mr. Stewart's family, have heard the same noise, and have been
equally surprised and frightened. Mr. Stewart has also offered any of
the tradespeople in the village an opportunity of remaining in the
house and convincing themselves. The shrieking last Wednesday week was
terrific. It was formerly reported in the village that the house was
haunted by a Rev. Gentleman, whose name was Mantal, who died there
about twenty-seven years since, and this is now generally believed
to be the case. His vault, in the inside of the church, has lately
been repaired, and a new stone put down. The house is adjoining the
churchyard, which has added, in no inconsiderable degree, to the horror
which pervades the villagers. The delusion must be very ingeniously
conducted, but at this time of day scarcely anyone can be found to
believe these noises proceed from any other than natural causes.

"On Wednesday se'nnight, Mr. Stewart requested several most respectable
gentlemen to sit up all night--namely, the Rev. Mr. Spurgeon of
Docking, the Rev. Mr. Goggs of Creake, the Rev. Mr. Lloyd of
Massingham, the Rev. Mr. Titlow of Norwich, and Mr. Banks, surgeon, of
Holt, and also Mrs. Spurgeon. Especial care was taken that no tricks
should be played by the servants; but, as if to give the visitors a
grand treat, the noises were even louder and of longer continuance than
usual. The first commencement was in the bed-chamber of Miss Stewart,
and seemed like the clawing of a voracious animal after its prey.
Mrs. Spurgeon was at the moment leaning against the bed-post, and the
effect on all present was like a shock of electricity. The bed was on
all sides clear from the wall; but nothing was visible. Three powerful
knocks were then given to the side-board, whilst the hand of Mr. Goggs
was upon it. The disturber was conjured to speak, but answered only by
a low hollow moaning; but on being requested to give three knocks, it
gave three most tremendous blows apparently in the wall. The noises,
some of which were as loud as those of a hammer on the anvil, lasted
from between eleven and twelve o'clock until near two hours after
sunrise. The following is the account given by one of the gentlemen:
'We all heard distinct sounds of various kinds--from various parts of
the room and the air--in the midst of us--nay, we felt the vibrations
of parts of the bed as struck; but we were quite unable to assign any
possible natural cause as producing all or any part of this. We had a
variety of thoughts and explanations passing in our minds _before_ we
were on the spot, but we left it all equally bewildered.' On another
night the family collected in a room where the noise had never been
heard; the maid-servants sat sewing round a table, under the especial
notice of Mrs. Stewart, and the man-servant, with his legs crossed
and his hands upon his knees, under the cognisance of his master.
The noise was then for the first time heard there--'above, around,
beneath, confusion all'--but nothing seen, nothing disturbed, nothing
felt except a vibratory agitation of the air, or a tremulous movement
of the tables or what was upon them. It would be in vain to attempt
to particularise all the various noises, knockings, and melancholy
groanings of this mysterious something. Few nights pass away without
its visitation, and each one brings its own variety. We have little
doubt that we shall ultimately learn that this midnight disturber is
but another '_Tommy Tadpole_,' but from the respectability and superior
intelligence of the parties who have attempted to investigate into the
secret, we are quite willing to allow to the believers in the earthly
visitations of ghosts all the support which this circumstance will
afford to their creed--that of _unaccountable mystery_. We understand
that inquiries on the subject have been very numerous, and we believe
we may even say troublesome, if not expensive."

(_Norfolk Chronicle_, June 1, 1833.)

       *       *       *       *       *