
"SYDERSTONE PARSONAGE

"_To the Editor of the Norfolk Chronicle._

"SIR,--My name having lately appeared in the _Bury Post_, as well as in
your own journal, without my consent or knowledge, I doubt not you will
allow me the opportunity of occupying some portion of your paper, in
way of explanation.

"It is most true that, at the request of the Rev. Mr. Stewart, I was
at the Parsonage at Syderstone, on the night of the 15th ult., for the
purpose of investigating the cause of the several interruptions to
which Mr. Stewart and his family have been subject for the last three
or four months. I feel it right, therefore, to correct some of the
erroneous impressions which the paragraph in question is calculated to
make upon the public mind, and at the same time to state fairly the
leading circumstances which transpired that night.

"At ten minutes before two in the morning, '_knocks_' were distinctly
heard; they continued at intervals, until after sunrise--sometimes
proceeding from the bed's-head, sometimes from the side-boards of the
children's bed, sometimes from a three-inch partition, separating
the children's sleeping-rooms; both sides of which partition were
open to observation. On two or three occasions, also, when a definite
number of blows was requested to be given, the precise number required
was distinctly heard. _How_ these blows were occasioned was the
subject of diligent search: every object was before us, but nothing
satisfactorily to account for them; no trace of any human hand, or of
mechanical power, was to be discovered. Still, I would remark, though
perfectly distinct, these knocks were by no means so powerful as your
paragraph represents--indeed, instead of '_being even louder, and of
longer continuance that night_, as if to give _the visitors a grand
treat_,' it would seem they were neither _so_ loud nor _so_ frequent
as they commonly had been. In several instances they were particularly
gentle, and the pauses between them afforded all who were present
the opportunity of exercising the most calm judgment and deliberate
investigation.

"I would next notice the '_vibrations_' on the side-board and post of
the children's beds. These were distinctly felt by myself as well as
others, not only once, but frequently. They were obviously the effect
of different blows, given in some way or other, upon the different
parts of the beds, in several instances while those parts were actually
under our hands. It is not true that '_the effect on all present was
like a shock of electricity_,' but that these '_vibrations_' did take
place, and that too in beds, perfectly disjointed from every wall, was
obvious to our senses; though in what way they were occasioned could
not be developed.

"Again--our attention was directed at different times during the
night to certain sounds on the bed's-head and walls, resembling the
scratchings of two or three fingers; but in _no_ instance were they
'_the clawing of a voracious animal after its prey_.' During the night
I happened to leave the spot in which the party were assembled, and to
wander in the dark to some more distant rooms in the house, occupied
by no one member of the family (but where the disturbances originally
arose), and there, to my astonishment, the same scratchings were to be
heard.

"At another time, also, when one of Mr. Stewart's children was
requested to hum a lively air, '_most scientific beatings_' to every
note was distinctly heard from the bed-head; and at its close, '_four
blows_' were given, louder (I think) and more rapid than any which had
before occurred.

"Neither ought I to omit that, at the commencement of the noises,
several feeble '_moans_' were heard. This happened more than once;
after a time they increased to a series of '_groanings_' of a
peculiarly distressing character, and proceeding (as it seemed) from
the bed of one of Mr. Stewart's children, about ten years of age. From
the tone of voice, as well as other circumstances, my own conviction
is, that these '_moans_' could not arise from any effort on the part
of the child. Perhaps there were others present who might have had
different impressions; but be this as it may, towards daybreak four or
six shrieks were heard--not from any bed or wall, but as hovering in
the atmosphere in the room, where the other noises had been principally
heard. These screams were distinctly heard by _all_, but their cause
was discoverable by _none_.

"These, Sir, are the chief events which occurred at Syderstone
Parsonage on the night alluded to in your paragraph. I understand
the '_knockings_' and '_sounds_' have varied considerably in their
character on different nights, and that there have been several nights
occurring (at four distinct periods) in which _no noises_ have been
heard.

"I have simply related what took place under my own observation. You
will perceive that the noises heard by us were by no means so loud
and violent as would be gathered from the representations which have
been made. Still, as you are aware, they are not on that account the
less real; nor do they, on that account, require the less rational
explanation. I trust, however, Mr. Editor, your readers will fully
understand me. I have not related the occurrences of the night for the
purpose of leading them to any particular views, or conclusions upon a
subject which, for the present at least, is wrapt in obscurity: such is
very remote from my object. But Mr. Stewart having requested me, as a
neighbouring clergyman, to witness the inconveniences and interruptions
to which the different members of his family have been subject for
the last sixteen weeks, I have felt it my duty, as an honest man
(particularly among the false statements now abroad) to bear my feeble
testimony, however inconsiderable it may be, to their actual existence
in his house; and also since, from the very nature of the case, it
is not possible Mr. Stewart can admit the repeated introduction of
strangers to his family, I have thought it likewise a duty I owed to
the public to place before them the circumstances which really did take
place on that occasion. In the words of your paragraph, I can truly
say: '_I had a variety of thoughts and explanations passing in my mind
before I was on the spot, but I left it perfectly bewildered_,' and I
must confess the perplexity has not been diminished by the result of an
investigation, which was most carefully pursued for five days, during
the past week, under the immediate direction of Mr. Reeve, of Houghton,
agent to the Marquis of Cholmondeley, the proprietor of Syderstone and
patron of the Rectory, and who, on learning the annoyances to which
Mr. Stewart was subject, directed every practicable aid to be afforded
for the purpose of discovery. Mr. Seppings and Mr. Savory, the two
chief inhabitants of the parish, assisted also in the investigation. A
'_trench_' was dug round the back part of the house, and '_borings_'
were resorted to in all other parts of it to the depth of six or seven
feet, completing a chain round the entire buildings, for the purpose of
discovering any subterranean communication with the walls, which might
possibly explain the noises in question. Many parts of the interior of
the house, also, such as '_the walls_,' '_floors_,' '_false roofs_,'
etc., have been minutely examined, but nothing has been found to throw
any light upon the source of the disturbances. Indeed, I understand the
'_knockings_' within the last four days, so far from having subsided,
are become increasingly distressing to Mr. Stewart and his family--and
so _remain_!--I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

  "JOHN SPURGIN.

"DOCKING, _June 5, 1833_."

       *       *       *       *       *