
"_To the Editor of the Norfolk Chronicle_.

  "NORWICH, _June 5, 1833_.

"SIR,--The detail of circumstances connected with the _Syderstone
Ghost_, as reported in the public papers, is in my opinion very
incorrect, and calculated to deceive the public. If the report of
noises heard on other evenings be as much exaggerated as in the report
of the noises which five other gentlemen and myself heard on Wednesday
evening, the 15th of May, nothing could be better contrived to foster
superstition and to aid deception. I was spending a few days with a
friend in the neighbourhood of Syderstone, and was courteously invited
by Mr. Stewart to sit up at the Parsonage; but I never imagined the
noises I heard during the night would become a subject of general
conversation in our city and county. As such is the case, and as I
have been so frequently appealed to by personal friends, I hope you
will afford the convenience of correcting, through the medium of your
journal, some of the errors committed in the reports made of the
disturbances which occurred when I was present. If the other visitors
thought proper to make their statements known to the public, I have no
doubt they would nearly accord with my own, as we are not, though so
represented in the _Bury Post_, 'those who deal in contradictions of
this sort.'

"The noises were _not loud_; certainly they were not so loud as to be
heard by those ladies and gentlemen who were sitting at the time of
their commencement in a bedroom only a few yards distant. The noises
commenced as nearly as possible at the hour we had been prepared
to expect they would--or at about half-past one o'clock a.m. It is
true that knocks seemed to be given, or actually were given, on the
side-board of a bed whilst Mr. Goggs' hands were upon it; but it is
not true that they were 'powerful knocks.' It is also true that Mr.
Goggs requested the ghost, if he could not speak, to give three knocks,
and that three knocks--gentle knocks, not 'three most tremendous
blows'--were heard as proceeding from the thin wall against which were
the beds of the children and the female servants. I heard a scream as
of a female, but I was not alarmed; I cannot speak _positively_ as to
the origin of the scream, but I cannot deny that such a scream may be
produced by a ventriloquist. The family are highly respectable, and I
know not any good reason for a suspicion to be excited against any one
of the members; but as it is _possible_ for one or two members of a
family to cause disturbances to the rest, I must confess that I should
be more satisfied that there is not a connection between the ghost and
a member of the family if the noises were distinctly heard in the rooms
when _all_ the members of the family were known to be at a distance
from them. I understood from Mr. Stewart that on one occasion the whole
family--himself, Mrs. Stewart, the children, and servants--sat up in
his bedroom during the night; that himself and Mrs. Stewart kept an
attentive watch upon the children and servants; and that the noises,
though seldom or never heard before in that room, were then heard in
all parts of the room. This fact, though not yet accounted for, is not
a proof but that some one or more of the family is able to give full
information of the cause of the noises.

"Mr. Stewart and other gentlemen declared that they have heard such
loud and violent knocking, and other strange noises, as certainly throw
a great mystery over the circumstance. I speak only in reference to
the knockings and the scream which I heard when in company with the
gentlemen whose names have been already made known to the public; and
confining my remarks to those noises, I hesitate not to declare that I
think similar noises might be caused by visible and internal agency.

"I do not deny the existence of supernatural agency, or of its
occasional manifestation; but I firmly believe such a manifestation
does not take place without Divine permission, and when permitted it
is not for trifling purposes, nor accompanied with _trifling effects_.
Now there are effects which appear to me _trifling_, connected with the
noises at Syderstone, and which therefore tend to satisfy my mind that
they are _not caused by supernatural agency_. On one occasion the ghost
was desired to give ten knocks; he gave nine, and, as if recollecting
himself that the number was not completed, he began again, and gave
ten. I heard him beat time to the air of the verse of a song sung by
Miss Stewart--if I mistake not, 'Home, Sweet Home'; and I heard him
give three knocks in compliance with Mr. Goggs' request.

"Mr. Editor, noises are heard in Syderstone Parsonage the cause or
agency of which is at present unknown to the public, but a full, a
diligent investigation ought _immediately_ to be made--Mr. Stewart, I
believe, is willing to afford facility. If, therefore, I may express an
opinion, that if two or three active and experienced police officers
from Norwich were permitted to be the sole occupants in the house
for a few nights, the ghost would not interrupt their slumbers, or,
if he attempted to do it, they would quickly find him out, and teach
him better manners for the future. The disturbances at the Parsonage
House, Epworth, in 1716, in some particulars resemble those which have
occurred at Syderstone, but in these days we give little credit to
tales of witchcraft, or that evil spirits are permitted to indicate
their displeasure at prayers being offered for the King, etc.; and
therefore I hope that deceptions practised at Syderstone, if there be
deceptions, will be promptly discovered, lest that parsonage become
equal in repute to the one at Epworth.--I am, Sir, your humble servant,

  "SAMUEL TITLOW."

(_Norfolk Chronicle_, June 8, 1833.)

       *       *       *       *       *