THE GREEN VAPOUR


Near Bournemouth there is a house called the Caspar Beeches that
never lets for any length of time. It has a very remarkable history,
which, in the words of Mr. Mark Wildbridge, I now append. (Mr. Mark
Wildbridge, by the way, was a clever amateur detective who died about
the middle of last century, and many of his experiences, including the
following, were narrated to me by one of his descendants.)

I had been attending to some newly planted shrubs in my garden, and was
crossing the lawn on my way to the back premises to wash my hands, when
the gate was swung open vigorously and a voice called out, "Can you
tell me if Mr. Mark Wildbridge lives here?"

I looked at the speaker. He was a tall young man, slim and clean built,
obviously an athlete, a public schoolman, and very much the gentleman.

I was by no means in the mood to receive strangers, but as his type
especially appeals to me, I decided to be gracious to him. "I am Mark
Wildbridge," I replied. "Can I be of any service to you?"

"Are you Mr. Wildbridge?" the young man said in astonishment. "Somehow
I had formed such a different picture of you. But, of course, there is
no reason why a detective should carry his trade in his face any more
than an artist or author."

"Rather less reason, perhaps," I responded dryly. "Have you come to
consult me professionally?"

The young man nodded. "Yes," he answered. "May I speak to you in
private, somewhere where there is no chance of our being overheard?"

I conducted him to my study, and, after seeing him seated, begged him
to proceed.

"Mr. Wildbridge," he began, leaning forward and eyeing me intently, "do
you believe in family curses?"

"It depends," I said. "I have come across cases where there seems
little doubt a family is labouring under some malign superphysical
influence. But why do you ask?"

"For this reason," he replied, sitting up straight and assuming an
expression of great intensity. "Two years ago I was living with my
parents at the Caspar Beeches, near Bournemouth. My brother was coming
home from India on sick leave, and my father and I had gone up to town
to meet him, when, the day after we arrived, we got a wire to say
that my mother had died suddenly. She had been absolutely well when
we left her, so that the shock, as you may imagine, was terrible. Of
course we hastened home at once, but the news was only too true--she
was dead, and, at the inquest which followed in due course, a verdict
of death from asphyxiation--cause unknown--was returned. Well, Mr.
Wildbridge, exactly six months later my father was also found dead in
his bedroom, and, as everything pointed to his having died in exactly
the same manner as my mother, my brother and I had a detective down
from Scotland Yard to inquire into the affair. He could, however, make
nothing of it. The door of my father's room was found locked on the
inside, the windows were all fastened, so that no one could have gained
admission; and, besides, as nothing had been touched, and not a single
article was missing, there was no apparent motive for a crime. At the
same time, my brother and I were far from satisfied. Although, as the
detective had pointed out to us, my father was alone when he met his
death, it seemed to us that his end must have been brought about by
some unnatural and outside agency. The coroner's verdict was death from
asphyxiation, the medical evidence tending to show that he had died
from the effects of some poisonous gas. Yet whence came the gas and
how was it administered? The sanitary authorities, whom we called in,
declared, after a very careful examination, that all the drains were
in the most excellent repair, so we simply didn't know what to think.
My brother, who had imbibed mysticism in India, at length came to the
conclusion that there was some curse on us. He said that my father had
on several occasions spoken very gloomily about the parents' sins being
visited on their children, and I, too, had noticed that my father at
times was very despondent; but I had attributed this despondency merely
to moodiness, and at the time pooh-poohed my brother's suggestion that
there existed a mystery--something sinister in connection with some
member of our own family. But since then I have altered my opinion,
for my brother, who inherited the property, has also been found
dead--killed by the same diabolical agency that for some unknown reason
brought about the deaths of my mother and father. The Caspar Beeches is
now mine, Mr. Wildbridge, and I have come to ask you what I had better
do."

"You think, of course, that you may share the fate of your mother,
father, and brother?" I asked.

"I think it extremely likely," he replied.

"You are the only one left in your family?"

"Yes," he said, "the only one."

"And what are your plans with regard to the Caspar Beeches?" I
inquired. "Do you think of residing there?"

"I haven't made up my mind," he replied; "that is one of the points
upon which I want your advice. I want to know what you think about
these deaths. Do you think they were due to some as yet undiscovered
physical cause, as, for instance, some unknown disease, or some gas
the sanitary authorities have not been able to trace--or, to the
superphysical?"

"I can form no opinion at present," I replied; "I must first have more
details. But from what you have said, I think this case presents some
novel and very extraordinary features. I should like to see the house.
By the way, you haven't told me your name."

"Mansfield," the young man said--"Eldred Mansfield."

"The son of Sir Thomas Mansfield, the Bornean explorer?"

"Yes."

"Then you are the present baronet?"

The young man nodded.

"And in the event of your death," I remarked, "to whom do the title and
estates revert?"

"I believe to some distant relative," Sir Eldred replied. "I cannot say
definitely, for I have never inquired. I have no first cousins, and I
know nothing about any others."

"That is rather odd," I observed, "not to know who succeeds you. Now,
tell me--of whom does your household at the Caspar Beeches consist?"

"The butler Parry, his wife, who is housekeeper, and four other
servants."

"Have the Parrys been with you long?"

"About four years."

"Do you like them?"

"Not altogether," Sir Eldred replied. "Parry is rather fussy and
officious, and his wife much too soapy. My father, however, found them
honest, and I don't suppose I could improve on them."

"Well," I said, "as I have already remarked, I can't give you an
opinion till I've seen the house. Supposing you engage me as your
secretary?"

"An excellent idea," Sir Eldred cried, his face lighting with
enthusiasm. "To tell the truth, I don't much like the idea of sleeping
there alone. Will you go back with me to-night? I will wire to Parry to
get a room ready for you."

As my time was my own just then, I agreed, and that afternoon saw me
tearing off in a taxi to meet Sir Eldred at Waterloo.

The Caspar Beeches, a large old family mansion, is situated nearer
Winton than Bournemouth proper, and in the midst of the most lovely
forest scenery. An air of impressive sadness hung around it, which,
although no doubt largely due to the season and lateness of the hour,
still, I thought, owed its origin, in part, to some very different
cause; and when, on entering, I glanced round the big, gloomy,
oak-panelled hall with its dim, far-reaching galleries, I inwardly
remarked that this might well be the home of a dozen hidden mysteries,
a dozen lurking assassins, that could prowl about and hide there,
without the remotest fear of discovery.

The door had been opened to us by a tall, thin, bald-headed old man,
with small and rather deep-set eyes of the most pronounced blue, and a
rather cut-away chin. He expressed himself overjoyed to see his young
master back again, and was most emphatic in his assurances that our
rooms were quite ready for us.

His wife, an elderly woman with dark, keen, penetrating eyes and
slightly prominent cheekbones, met us in the hall. I knew, of course,
that she was Mrs. Parry, when she spoke, but her voice came as a
surprise. In striking contrast to her appearance it was soft and low,
and not altogether unmusical. The other servants did not interest me
much--they were the type one sees in all well-to-do establishments--and
yet I felt that if I were to get at the bottom of the mystery that
unquestionably shrouded the deaths of Sir Eldred's three relatives,
I must watch everyone very closely; for the key to a great secret is
often found where least expected.

We dined at eight o'clock, and after dinner I took a brief survey of
the house. This enabled me to form some idea of the general arrangement
of the rooms and where certain of them were situated. My bedroom, I
found, was separated from that of Sir Eldred by the entire length of a
corridor, and at my suggestion the room adjoining his own was allotted
to me instead. Mrs. Parry demurred a little at the change, remarking
that the room next Sir Eldred's had not been aired; but I told her I
was not in the least degree likely to catch cold, as I had often slept
in queer places, having spent a considerable portion of my life in the
backwoods of Canada. Sir Eldred laughed.

"You don't know what care we are taken of here," he said. "I can assure
you, if I were to feel even the suspicion of a draught it would be
considered a most terrible calamity."

"Yes, indeed," Mrs. Parry said, with a sigh, "after what has happened,
Sir Eldred's life is so precious we feel we cannot be too careful."

"Have you any idea what killed your late master and mistress?" I asked
her aside. "What terrible times you have gone through!"

"Ay, terrible indeed," she said. "A kinder master and mistress no one
could have had. Parry and I always thought something blew in from
outside. There is too much vegetation in the grounds, and it grows so
near the house. They do say the place is built on the site of a morass."

"A morass, and in Hampshire!" I laughed. "Why, that sounds incredible.
The soil is surely gravel."

"So it may be--now," she replied. "I'm speaking of many years ago. The
house is very ancient, sir."

I asked Sir Eldred afterwards if there was any truth in her remark, and
he said, "Yes, I believe there was a swamp here once; at least there is
mention of one in a very old history of Hampshire that we have in the
library. It was drawn off towards the end of the sixteenth century when
the house was built. But I'm surprised at the Parrys knowing anything
about it, for I've never heard anyone allude to it--not even my father."

"Are the Parrys of the ordinary servant class?" I asked.

"I believe so," Sir Eldred replied; "but I really know nothing of their
antecedents, for I seldom encourage them to speak. As I told you, they
both rather get on my nerves."

That night, some hours after the household had retired to rest, I took
a rope out of my portmanteau, and, fixing one end of it securely
to the bedstead, lowered myself out of the window on to the ground
beneath. Then, keeping under cover of the pine trees, and evading the
moonbeams as much as possible, I made a detour of the house. The night
air smelt pure and sweet. Heavily charged with the scent of pinewood
and heather, there was absolutely nothing about it even remotely
suggestive of poisonous gas.

As I was about to emerge from the trees to re-enter the house, I heard
a slight crunching sound on the gravel. I sprang back again into the
gloom, and as I did so, two figures--a man and girl--stole noiselessly
past me.

The girl I could not see distinctly, as her head was partly enveloped
in a cloak, but the face of the man stood out very plainly in the
moonlight--it was the face of a black!

What could a black man and a young girl be doing prowling about the
grounds of the Caspar Beeches at that hour of night? Who were they?

I did not say a word to anyone, but the following night--at the same
hour--I again hid amongst the trees, and the same figures passed me.
Then I stole out of my lair and followed them.

On quitting the premises they took the high road to Bournemouth, and
finally entered a house in the Holdenhurst Road. Making a mental note
of the number of the house, I retraced my steps homeward, and early
the next morning I sent the following telegram to Vane, who often
accompanies me on my expeditions, and to whose quick wits I owe much:

  "Have an important case on hand. Meet me this evening entrance to
  Bournemouth pier 7 p.m."

After dispatching this telegram I returned to the Beeches, and asked
Sir Eldred to show me the rooms in which the three deaths had taken
place. I then examined these rooms most minutely, but I could discover
nothing in them that could in any way help me to form a theory or even
get a suggestion.

"When were the deaths first discovered?" I asked.

"Not until the morning," Sir Eldred replied, "when the servants,
getting no reply to their knocks, became alarmed, and eventually the
doors were forced open."

"And in each case death had taken place in bed?"

"Yes."

"Did you have the same doctor to all three of your relatives after
their deaths had been discovered?" I asked Sir Eldred.

"Yes," he said. "Dr. Bowles. He has attended us for years."

"What age is he?" I inquired.

Sir Eldred thought a moment. "About sixty-four or five," he replied.
"He attended my father long before he was married."

"Then he would be a little old-fashioned," I said. "He might not, for
instance, have much knowledge of the newest poisons. New poisons, you
know, both in the form of liquid and gases, are constantly being
discovered. Many are imported from Germany and the East. Might I see
Dr. Bowles?"

"Certainly," Sir Eldred replied; "but I fear he cannot help you much,
as all he knew he made public at the inquests."

Sir Eldred was right practically. In my interview with Dr. Bowles, I
found that he could tell me little beyond what I already knew. "Can
you," I asked him, "describe the appearance of the bodies and the
effect on them of the gas which you say, in all probability, caused the
asphyxiation? Was there anything specially remarkable in the facial
contractions or colour of the skin?"

"Yes," he said, "there was an infinite horror, such horror as I have
never seen in human faces before," and he shuddered as he spoke. Then
he gave me a minute description of the bodies, which I took down in my
notebook and posted to a specialist in Oriental poisons whom I knew in
London.

"Was there nothing else in the three cases that struck you as unusual?"
I asked Dr. Bowles. "No peculiarity in common?"

He thought for a moment, and then said, "Nothing beyond the fact that
all three died precisely at the same time--ten minutes past two in the
morning."

"The time when human vitality is at the lowest, and superphysical
phenomena the most common. Were the victims in a normal state of
health? Was there any family or hereditary disease?"

"Yes, valvular weakness of the heart."

"Which would render them more susceptible to the influence of poison?"

"Poison and shock. The inhalation of certain poisons has a particularly
deadly effect on people suffering from cardiac defection."

"Could the poison have been self-inflicted? Are people suffering with
such a disease prone to suicide?"

"Only, as a rule, when the disease is in a very advanced state--you
then get delirium, hallucinations, and morbid impulses."

"And none of these symptoms were noticeable in the deceased?"

"Not in a sufficiently marked degree to warrant the suggestion of
suicide."

"Have you no theory?"

The doctor shook his head. "None whatever," he said; "and yet I'm sorry
to say I can't help feeling there is something very sinister about it
all--something that bodes ill for Sir Eldred."

Much disappointed, I returned to the Caspar Beeches, and was making
another inspection of the room in which one of the tragedies had
occurred when, chancing to glance at the mirror over the mantelshelf, I
caught the reflection of a pair of dark eyes fixed inquiringly at me. I
looked round, and a figure passed along the passage. It was Mrs. Parry.
She had evidently been peeping at me through the slightly open door,
which I could have sworn I had closed. This made me careful. If I meant
to unravel this mystery, I must on no account be seen doing anything
that might arouse suspicion as to my real identity. Hence I determined
to confine myself more to the study in future, and the rest of the
morning I spent taking down in shorthand letters which Sir Eldred
dictated. Walls have ears, and the sound of Sir Eldred dictating to me,
I argued, might prove convincing.

A week passed and I discovered nothing. There was nothing in the
demeanour of any of the servants to give me the slightest reason for
suspecting them; if any of them were "in the know" they kept their
secret absolutely to themselves. At night, as soon as I deemed it
safe, I slipped on a pair of rubber shoes and crept about the house
and grounds, but with no result. On the morning of the eighth day I
received two letters--one from Vane, who had taken furnished apartments
next door to the house I had noted in the Holdenhurst Road, and the
other from Craddock, the poison specialist.

  "I have at last found out something about those two people," Vane
  wrote. "They call themselves Effie and George Tyson. Tyson is an
  assumed name; the girl is the daughter of Parry, Sir Eldred's
  butler, and the man is Henry Mansfield, nephew of Sir Thomas."

"Great heavens!" I could not help exclaiming. "This is news indeed. Sir
Eldred assured me that he had no very near relatives."

  "Their bedroom is only separated from mine," the letter went on,
  "by a very thin wall, and when I had removed a brick I could catch
  every word they said. There's some mystery, and I'm going to try
  and solve it for you. Watch at the Beeches. I believe there is
  something extra in the wind. Effie has been there already this
  morning, and she and George are both going there again late this
  evening."

The other letter, from Craddock, was as follows:

  "There's only one gas that produces all the effects you describe,"
  he said, "and that has certainly been hitherto unknown in England;
  indeed, the knowledge of it has been strictly confined to one
  region--a district in the south-east of Borneo. The natives there
  worship a great spirit, which they name the Arlakoo or Hell-faced
  one, and they never invoke it save when they desire the death of
  a criminal, or some very aged, useless member of the tribe. They
  then prepare a mixture of herbs and berries, which they first of
  all dry, and, at the psychical hour of two in the morning, put in
  an iron pot and take into the presence of their intended victim.
  Then, having set fire to the preparation, which, though rather
  difficult to ignite, burns slowly and surely when once aflame, they
  close all the openings of the hut or room and beat a precipitate
  retreat. A few minutes later the spirit they have invoked appears,
  and, simultaneous with its materialisation, the mixture burns a
  bright green and emits a peculiarly offensive gas. The result is
  invariably death: the shock produced by the harrowing appearance of
  the apparition, coupled with the poisonous nature of the fumes, is
  more than the human mechanism can stand. Of course all this would
  be mere moonshine to anyone who is uninitiated in Eastern ways and
  doesn't believe in ghosts. The Bournemouth doctors would pooh-pooh
  it altogether. There is no other gas that I know of that produces
  the effects you have described. If there is another case, let me
  know, as I should much like to see the victim."

A ghost! A ghost employed for the purpose of murdering someone! Even to
me, confirmed believer in the Unknown as I am, the idea seemed wildly
improbable and fantastic. And yet, what else could have produced that
look of horror in the faces? What else could have killed them?

That evening, Sir Eldred and I sat in the smoke-room after dinner and
chatted away as usual. We had our coffee brought to us at nine o'clock,
and at ten-thirty we retired to bed. Sir Eldred had appeared fidgety
and nervous all the evening, and, as we were ascending the stairs, he
asked me if I would mind sitting up with him.

"I feel I shan't sleep to-night," he said, "as I've got one of my
restless moods on. If it won't be tiring you too much, will you come
and sit with me?"

I said I would with pleasure, but I did not join him at once, as I
wanted the servants to think we had gone to our respective rooms and
to bed as usual. I also wanted whatever there might be in the wind to
mature.

On entering my room, I opened the window with as little noise as
possible, and was on the verge of lowering myself into the garden when
I espied someone among the trees. I was going to draw back, when the
figure signalled, and I at once knew it was Vane.

Another minute and I had found him. "He's here," he whispered, "be
on the qui vive, and if you want help call. See, I'm armed." And
he pointed significantly to his breast pocket. He was going to say
something else when we heard steps--soft, surreptitious steps that
hardly sounded human--coming in our direction. I immediately withdrew
to the house and hastened to Sir Eldred. At my suggestion we both sat
by the window, which I noticed was shut--Sir Eldred, I knew, was very
susceptible to the cold--and I arranged the curtains so that we could
not be seen from the outside. Sir Eldred occupied a sofa and I an easy
chair. For some time we talked in low voices, and then Sir Eldred grew
more and more drowsy till he finally fell asleep.

It was one of the most exquisite nights I had ever seen--the moon, so
full and silvery, and everywhere so calm, so gentle, and so still. Not
a breath of air, not a leaf stirring, not a sound to be heard; nothing
save the occasional burr of a great black bat as it hurled itself past
the window and went wheeling and skimming in and out the tall, slender
pines. I sat still, my eyes wandering alternately from the window to
Sir Eldred. Whence would come the danger my instinct told me threatened
him? How calmly he slept! How marked and handsome were his boyish
features!

Suddenly from afar off a distant church clock began to strike two, each
chime falling with an extraordinary distinctness on the preternatural
hush.

Hardly had the last reverberating echoes ceased before there was a loud
click from somewhere near the fireplace, and the next moment came a
faint smell of burning. Then I confess--remembering all Craddock had
told me--I was afraid. Everything in the room--the big, open fireplace,
the dark, gleaming wardrobe, the quaintly carved chairs, the rich
but fantastically patterned curtains, the sofa, and even Sir Eldred
himself--I hardly dared look at him--seemed impregnated with a strange
and startling uncanniness. The green light! Was this the prelude to it?
Was the terrible Bornean phantasm getting ready to manifest itself?

I struggled hard, and, at last, overcoming the feeling of utter
helplessness that had begun to steal over me, rushed to the windows.
Frantically throwing them open, I was preparing to do the same to the
door, when a low, ominous wail, sounding at first from very far away,
and then all of a sudden from quite close at hand, brought me to a
standstill, and the whole room suddenly became illuminated with a glow,
of a shade and intensity of green I have never seen before. Again there
came an awful struggle. I felt eyes glaring at me, eyes that belonged
to something of infinite hideousness and hate, to something that was
concentrating its very hardest to make--to force--me to look; and it
was only by an effort that smothered my chest and forehead in beads
of cold sweat I desisted. Groping my way across the room, with my eyes
tightly closed, I eventually reached the sofa. Thank God! Sir Eldred
was still asleep. Tired with a day's hard exercise, he had fallen into
the soundest of slumbers. Putting one hand over his eyes, and seizing
him by the shoulder with the other, I speedily roused him. "Quick,
quick!" I shouted. "For the love of God get up quick! Keep your mouth
tightly shut and follow me." Pushing and dragging him along, I made for
the direction of the door. The poison fumes now began to take effect;
my temples throbbed, my brain was on fire, a tight, agonising feeling
of suffocation gripped my chest and throat, and, as I staggered with
Sir Eldred across the threshold on to the landing beyond, a sea of
blackness suddenly enveloped me, and I knew no more.

       *       *       *       *       *