
On coming to, I found myself lying on the floor of the corridor with
Vane bending over me. "I was just in time," he said. "I saw you at the
window, saw you suddenly throw up your arms and stagger away from it,
and, guessing what was happening, I ran to the house and, climbing up
the rope you had left hanging out of your window, I managed to reach
you."

"Sir Eldred?" I panted.

"Oh, he's all right," Vane replied. "He wasn't really so far gone as
you. A few minutes more, though, and you would both have been dead.
Now keep cool and don't say anything about it. As soon as the air has
cleared--quite cleared mind--go to bed, and come down in the morning
as if nothing had happened. Fortunately you made no noise, and I feel
sure no one saw me enter the house. If you will let me take the lead in
this affair, I think we may ferret the whole thing out. But we must go
carefully. You don't mind my playing the part of instructor?"

"No," I laughed, "I don't mind how despotic you are so long as we get
to the bottom of this mystery. Fire ahead."

"Very well then," Vane said. "Get up now and hurry off to bed. And
remember--both of you--not a word to anyone."

Vaulting on to the window-sill as he spoke, he caught hold of the rope
and was speedily lost to view.

When we came down in the morning we were very careful to make no
allusion to the night's happening before the servants, but strove to
appear quite normal and unconcerned.

I watched Parry's face when he first encountered us, but it was quite
immobile. "He is either quite innocent," I thought, "or a very old
hand."

When we were alone, Sir Eldred was very anxious to hear what I thought.
"Have you been able to form any theory," he asked, "because I haven't.
I don't see how any of the servants could have let that infernal stuff
loose in the room last night. I can swear there was no one there but
ourselves. And for the life of me I can't see any motive. If any living
person is responsible for it, he must be a lunatic, for no one here
has anything to gain by my death."

"You are quite sure you have no near relatives?" I said.

"Absolutely," he replied. "To the best of my knowledge I am the very
last of the Hampshire Mansfields."

Our conversation was abruptly ended by the entrance of a maid with a
sealed note. It was from Vane.

  "At eleven o'clock to-night," he wrote, "get Sir Eldred to tell the
  Parrys they must sit up with him and you in his bedroom. See that
  he doesn't let them off, as they are sure to make excuses. Also get
  Craddock to come down by an early afternoon train, and tell him to
  call round and see me immediately he arrives. Leave the rest to me."

This note needing no reply, I hastened off at once to the General
Post Office and telegraphed to Craddock. Fortunately he was at home,
and wired that he would leave Waterloo by the two o'clock train. The
remainder of the day passed very slowly. At ten o'clock that night
someone whistled from the pines, and I knew at once that it was Vane.
Craddock was with him. I conducted them both into Sir Eldred's room,
where they were closeted together for some time, neither Sir Eldred
nor I being allowed to enter. At last eleven o'clock arrived, and Sir
Eldred went to fetch the Parrys. Both strongly demurred. Parry declared
he was unwell, and Mrs. Parry said she had never heard of such a
thing; but Sir Eldred insisted, and they were obliged at last to follow
him upstairs. Vane and Craddock had hidden themselves so that the
Parrys only saw me.

"What do you want us to do?" Parry asked nervously.

"Merely to sit up with us and watch," Sir Eldred said. "Mr. Anderson"
(my alias) "and I have a presentiment that something may happen
to-night and we don't relish the idea of facing it alone."

"I'd really rather not, sir," Parry faltered.

"That doesn't matter," Sir Eldred said sternly. "It is my wish. Come,
if you talk like that, I shall begin to think you are both afraid. We
will arrange ourselves round the fireplace. I've an idea that whatever
comes will come down the chimney. You sit there, Parry, next to Mr.
Anderson. Mrs. Parry shall sit by me." And without further to do he
pushed them both into their seats. I could see they were very much
agitated, but they both lapsed into silence, and for some considerable
time no one in the room spoke. My thoughts, as I presumed did Sir
Eldred's, chiefly centred round the question as to what was the great
surprise Vane had in store for us. What had he discovered? What had he
been so carefully plotting with Craddock?

On flew the minutes, and at last Sir Eldred struck a match; for the
moon was temporarily hidden by big, black, scouring clouds. "Egad!" he
said, "It's close on two. The hour fatal to my family. If anything is
going to happen to-night it should take place almost immediately."

"If I was you, sir," Mrs. Parry burst out, "I wouldn't sit up any
longer. I feel sure nothing will happen to-night, and if it does, our
being here can do no good."

"That's the truth," Parry echoed.

"You must wait a little longer," Sir Eldred said. "See, it's almost on
the stroke!" As he spoke, the moon shone out again in all her brilliant
lustre, and every object in the room became clearly visible. Every eye
was fixed on the clock.

"I'm going," Mrs. Parry cried, springing to her feet. "I'm going,
Sir Eldred, if you give me notice to leave. I've had enough of this
nonsense." She was about to add more, when there was a sudden click,
exactly similar to the click we had heard the preceding night, the
dome-shaped top of the clock flew open, and the smell of something
burning, but a far sweeter and more subtle odour than that of the
night before, filled the room. In an instant the whole place was in
an uproar. Mrs. Parry shrieked for help, and declared she was being
choked, whilst Parry, falling on his knees, clutched hold of Sir Eldred
and implored his forgiveness.

"Now I'm about to die, sir," he whined, "I'll confess all. It's that
cousin of yours, George, who you never heard tell of. He's married to
my daughter Effie, and he wanted to come into your property. He put us
up to it; we only acted at his bidding."

"That's a lie," a voice called out, and from behind the window-curtain
stepped Vane, closely followed by Craddock. "You see, you can't help
lying, Parry, even when death stares you in the face. Open the window
a little wider, Mr. Craddock, so that all this smoke, which is quite
harmless, by the way, can get out, and I'll explain everything. The
two people who have been in the habit of prowling about your premises
at night, Sir Eldred, are Effie, the daughter of these miscreants
here, and George Mansfield, the son of your Uncle Richard, whom Parry,
truthful for once in his life, said you had never heard of. Your
father never mentioned his nephew to you because he was a half-caste,
Richard Mansfield, to your father's undying disgust, having married a
native of Borneo. George was brought up in Borneo, and only came to
England for the first time three years ago, shortly after his father's
death. He had heard all about the family quarrel, and, arriving in
this country with none too friendly feelings towards your parents,
sought an interview with Sir Thomas, who, if George's version of it
is correct, was very curt, forbidding him ever again to enter the
house. Filled with intense hatred against you all, George Mansfield
went to London, and about that time met Effie Parry, who was then on
'the halls,' acting under the name of Grahame. In due course of time
he married her, and it was she who first suggested to him the idea of
contriving by some means or other to come into the family estate. It
is easy enough to gather what lay at the back of her brain when she
used the euphemism 'some means or other.' Life in the south-eastern
states of Borneo, from which George Mansfield hails, is held of small
account; he at once tumbled to the suggestion, and decided to summon
to his assistance a spirit they worship out there called Arlakoo. In
order to invoke the Arlakoo it was essential that certain herbs should
be procured, and this necessitated time and expense. Eventually,
however, through the agency of friends--Borneans--they were obtained.
Then came the question of introducing them into the right quarters.
Effie's parents both inherit criminal tendencies: Parry's Uncle James
was a notorious forger, and Mrs. Parry's grandmother was hanged for
baby-farming. You needn't look so indignant, you two, for I've been
to the C.I.D.--you know what the C.I.D. is--for my information. Well,
the Parrys were taken into confidence, and Sir Thomas, being in need
of both a butler and housekeeper just then, the two applied for the
posts and got them. The rest was comparatively easy. George is an
engineer by profession and has a good inventive faculty. Coming to
this house when the family were all away, he espied the clock you see
on the mantelshelf, in the room your mother and father slept in, and,
on examining the dome, discovered that it opened, and that there was
a Cupid inside it which, when in proper working order, bounced out
whenever the hour struck. It appears to have been in your family a good
many years, Sir Eldred, for George Mansfield had previously come across
a reference to it in one of his father's diaries, and his fertile
brain now conceived the idea of using it in the process of carrying his
scheme into effect. In the place of the Cupid he resolved to insert a
miniature brazier containing the herbs and supplied with an electric
fuse, the mechanism of which could be so contrived that whenever the
clock should strike two, and two only, the dome would fly open, the
brazier spring up, and the herbal preparation be ignited. He was only
too well aware of the hereditary tendency of the Mansfield family to
heart disease, and calculated that the shock of seeing so awful an
apparition as the Arlakoo (which he firmly believed he could call
up), together with the poisonous fumes that accompanied it--provided
the door and windows were shut, which could be accomplished with the
assistance of the Parrys--would encompass the deaths he desired. He
chose, for his first victim, your mother. The day you and your father
went to London to meet your brother, Parry smuggled George Mansfield
into the house, and the latter, seizing an opportunity when your
mother was out, fitted up the clock with the brazier containing the
herbal preparation and the fuse. As you know, his diabolical scheme
succeeded only too well, not only your mother, but your father and
brother falling victims to it. This morning Mrs. Parry paid a visit to
her son-in-law, and I overheard their conversation. Great surprise was
expressed at the failure of the clock yesterday, and it was decided
to try it again to-night. This is the result. The vapour you saw come
out of the clock just now was a quite harmless gas which Mr. Craddock
substituted for the original preparation George Mansfield had put
there. We caught George nicely in the garden shortly after nine. We
threatened to treat him in a thoroughly Bornean fashion"--and Vane
produced his revolver--"and he then confessed everything. He is now in
the safe custody of the C.I.D. men."

"How did you come to suspect the clock, Vane?" I asked.

"You forget the hole in the wall," he said, laughing. "I overheard
continual allusion to the clock, and 'filling and charging' it again,
and as I knew it was not customary to fill and charge clocks, I at once
smelt a rat. My suspicions were confirmed when I came to your rescue
last night and saw tiny spirals of the green vapour still emanating
from the dome-shaped top. I consulted with Mr. Craddock, and with his
assistance I was able to carry out this little plot which, I think,
we will all agree has succeeded almost beyond expectation. Any more
questions?"

"Not for the present, Mr. Vane," Sir Eldred said. "I must, first of
all, express my deep sense of gratitude to you for the clever way in
which you have managed to frustrate the plot to take my life. You have
captured one villain; it now remains to deal with these scoundrels
here. I wish to goodness my cousin had not been involved in it. I
suppose, by the way, there is no doubt that this George Mansfield is my
cousin?"

"I fear none whatever," Vane said. "I called at his rooms when I knew
he was out, and found documents there which fully established his
identity. I'm afraid you must prosecute him with the others."

But Sir Eldred, fortunately, was spared that degradation; for hardly
had Vane finished speaking when one of the C.I.D. men arrived at the
house and informed us that George Mansfield was no more. He had evaded
justice by swallowing a poisonous lozenge which he had secreted in his
handkerchief.

The Parrys were let go; the law does not acknowledge the superphysical,
and Sir Eldred recognised the futility of prosecuting them. They
eventually went to Canada and were heard of no more. The Caspar
Beeches, however, had got a sinister name; no tradespeople would
venture within its grounds after dusk, and no servants would stay
there. Sir Eldred himself lived in a constant state of fear, and
confided in me that he frequently heard strange noises--doors opening
and shutting of their own accord, and soft, inexplicable footsteps.
Eventually the house was shut up, and, although it has since been
periodically occupied, no one ever cares to remain in it for long.

When once invoked, it seems that spirits, especially evil ones, have
an unpleasant habit of clinging to a person or place, and, in spite of
what some people assert, can seldom, if ever, be laid.



