
"It was a cold night. Rain had been falling steadily not only for hours
but days--the ground was saturated. As I walked along the country
lane, the slush splashed over my boots and trousers. To my left was a
huge stone wall, behind which I could see the nodding heads of pines;
and through them the wind was rushing, making a curious whistling
sound--now loud, now soft--roaring and gently murmuring. The sound
fascinated me. I fancied it might be the angry voice of a man and the
plaintive pleading of a woman, and then, a weird chorus of unearthly
beings, of grotesque things that stalked across the moors and crept
from behind huge boulders. Nothing but the wind was to be heard. I
stood and listened to it. I could have listened for hours, for I felt
in harmony with my surroundings--lonely. The moon showed itself at
intervals from behind the scudding clouds and lighted up the open
landscape to my right. A gaunt hill covered with rocks, some piled up
pyramidically, others strewn here and there; a few trees with naked
arms tossing about and looking distressfully thin beside the more
stalwart boulders; a sloping field or two, a couple of level ones,
crossed by a tiny path; and the lane, where I stood. The scenery was
desolate--not actually wild, but sad and forlorn; and the wood by my
side lent an additionally weird aspect to the place, which was pleasing
to me.

"Suddenly I heard a sound--a sound, familiar enough at other times;
but, at this hour, and in this place, everything seemed different. A
woman was coming along the road--a woman in a dark cloak, with a basket
under her arm; and the wind was blowing her skirts about her legs.

"I looked at the trees. One singularly gaunt and fantastic one
appalled me. It had long, gnarled arms, and two of them ended in
bunches of twigs like hands--yes, they were exactly like hands--huge,
murderous-looking hands, with bony fingers. The moonlight played over
and around me--I was bathed in it. I had no business to be on the
earth--my proper place was in the moon. I no longer thought it--I knew
it. The woman was close at hand. She stopped at a little wicket gate
leading into the lane skirting the northern boundary of the wood. I
felt angry; what right had she to be there, interrupting my musings
with the moon! The tree with the human hands appeared to agree. I saw
anger in the movements of its branches--anger, which soon blazed into
fury. It gave a mighty bend towards her, as if longing to rend her in
pieces.

"I followed the woman; and the wind howled louder and louder through
those rustling leaves.

"How long I scrambled on I do not know. As soon as the moonlight left
me, I fell into a kind of slumber--a delicious trance, broken only
by the restless murmurings, the sighings and groanings of the wind.
Sweeter music I never heard. Then came a terrible change. The charm of
my thoughts was broken--I awoke from my reverie.

"A terrific roar broke on my ears, and a perfect hurricane of rain
swept through the wood. I crept cold and shivering beneath the shelter
of the trees. To my surprise a hand fell on my shoulder: it was a man,
and, like myself, he shivered.

"'Who are you?' he whispered, in a strangely hoarse voice. 'Who are
you? Why are you here?'

"'You wouldn't believe me if I told you,' I replied, shaking off the
man's grasp.

"'Well,--tell me,' he rejoined; 'for God's sake tell me.' He was
frightened--trembling with fright. Could it be the storm, or was
it--was it those trees?

"I told him then and there why I had trespassed. I was fascinated--the
wind--and the trees--had led me thither.

"'So am I,' he whispered; 'I am fascinated. It is a long word, but it
describes my sentiments. What did the wind sound like?'

"I told him. He was a poor, common man, and had no poetical ideas.
The wildly romantic had never interested him--he was but an ignorant
labouring man.

"'Sounded like sighing, groaning, and so on?' he said, repeating my
words, and shifting uneasily from one foot to another. He was cold,
horribly cold. 'Was that all?'

"'Yes, of course. Why ask?' I replied. Then I laughed. This stupid,
sturdy son of toil had been scared; to him the sounds had been those of
his moorland bogies--things he had dreaded in his infancy. I told him
so. He didn't like to hear me make fun of him. He didn't like my laugh,
and he persisted: 'Was that all you heard?'

"Then I grew impatient, and asked him to explain what he meant.

"'Well,' he said, 'I thought I heard a scream,--a cry. Just as if some
one had jumped out on some one else and taken them unawares. Maybe it
was the wind--only the wind. But it had an eerie sound.'

"The man was nervous. The storm had frightened away whatever little wit
he may have possessed.

"'Come, let us be going,' I said, moving off in the direction of the
wall. I wanted to find a new exit; I was tired of paths.

"The man kept close to me. I could hear his teeth chatter. Accidentally
his hand brushed against mine. His flesh was icy cold. He gave a cry
as if a snake had bitten him. Then the truth flashed through me. The
man was mad. His terror, his strange manner of showing it, and now
this sudden shrinking from me revealed it all--he was mad--the moon and
trees had done their work.

"'I'm not going that way,' he said, 'come along with me. I want to see
which of the trees it was that cried.'

"His voice was changed; he seemed suddenly to have grown stranger.
There was no insanity in his tone now. But I knew the cunning of the
insane, and I feared to anger him, so I acquiesced. What an idea! One
of the trees had cried! Did he mean the wind?

"He grew sullen when I jeered at him. He led me to a little hollow in
the ground, and I noticed the prints of several feet in the wet mud.
Then I saw something which sent the cold blood to my heart. A woman
bathed in blood lay before me. Somehow she was familiar to me. I looked
again--then again. Yes, there was the dark shawl, the basket--broken,
it was true, with the contents scattered; but it was the same basket.
It was the woman I had seen coming down the road.

"'My God, whatever is this!' The man by my side spoke. He swayed
backwards and forwards on his feet, his face white and awful in the
moonlight. He was sick with terror. 'Oh God, it is horrible--horrible!'
Then, with a sudden earnestness and a crafty look in his eyes, he bent
over her.

"'Who is it?' he cried. 'Who is the poor wretch?'

"I saw him peer into her face, but he didn't touch her--he dreaded the
blood. Then he started back, his eyes filled with such savageness as I
had never seen in any man's before. He looked a devil--he was a devil.
'It's my wife!' he shrieked. 'My wife!' His voice fell and turned into
what sounded like a sob. 'It's Mary. She was coming back to Helvore. It
was her cry. There--see it--confound you! You have it on your arm--your
coat--all over you.'

"He raised his hand to strike me. The moonlight fell on it--a great
coarse hand--and I noticed, with a thrill of horror, a red splash on
it. It was blood. The man was a murderer. He had killed his wife, and,
with all the cunning of the madman, was trying to throw the guilt on me.

"I sprang at him with a cry of despair. He kicked and bit, and tried to
tear my arms from his neck; but somehow I seemed to have ten times my
usual strength.

"And all the time we struggled a sea of faces waved to and fro, peering
down at us from the gaunt trees above.

"He gave in at length. I was no longer obliged to hold him with an iron
grip, and help came eventually in the shape of a policeman, who seemed
to grasp the situation quite easily. There had been a murder; the man
I had secured was known to him. He was a labouring man of unsteady
habits; he had been drinking, had met and quarrelled with his wife. The
rest was to be seen in the ghastly heap before us.

"The wretch had no defence. He seemed dazed, and eyed the bloodstains
on his face and clothes in a stupid kind of way.

"I slipped five shillings into the policeman's hand when we parted. He
thanked me and pocketed the money; he knew his position and mine too;
I was a gentleman, and a very plucky one at that. So I thought as I
walked back to my rooms; yet I lay awake and shuddered as visions of
the nodding heads of pines passed before me; and from without, across
the silent lanes and fields, there rose and fell again the wailing of a
woman--a woman in distress.

       *       *       *       *       *