
"The murder in the wood was an event in Helvore. The people were unused
to such tragedies, and it afforded them something to talk about for
many weeks. The evidence against the husband was conclusive. He had
been caught red-handed, he was an habitual drunkard, and he paid the
penalty for his crime in the usual manner.

"I left Helvore. I had seen enough of Cumberland and thirsted for life
in London once again. Yet, often at night, the sighing of the wind in
the trees sounded in my ears, bidding me visit them once more.

"One day as I was sitting by my fire with a pile of books at my side,
taking life easily, for I had nothing to do but to kill time, my old
friend, Frank Leethwaite, looked me up. He had been at Sedbergh with me
in the far-off eighties, and he was the only friend of the old set with
whom I had been out of touch.

"He had not altered much, in spite of a moustache and a fair sprinkling
of white hairs. I should have known him had I met him anywhere. He was
wearing an Albert coat, and his face was red with healthy exercise.

"'How are you, old chap?' he exclaimed, shaking hands in the hearty
fashion of true friendship.

"I winced, for he had strong hands.

"'Fit enough,' I said, 'only a bit bored. But you--well, you look just
the same, and fresh as a daisy.' I gave him the easy-chair.

"'Oh, I'm first rate--plenty of work. I'm a journalist, you know. It's
a bit of a grind, but I'm taking a holiday. You look pale. Your eyes
are bad?'

"I told him they got strained if I read much.

"'I daresay you will think me mad,' he went on, 'but I'm going to ask
you rather a curious question. I remember you used to be fond of ghosts
and all sorts of queer things.'

"I nodded. We had had many discussions on such subjects, in my study at
school.

"'Well, I'm a member of the New Supernatural Investigation Society.'

"I smiled doubtfully. 'Well, you can't say it has discovered much. The
name is high-sounding, but that is all.'

"'Never mind. Some day, perhaps, we shall show the public what we can
do.'

"Leethwaite lit a cigarette, puffed away in silence for a few seconds,
and then went on:

"'I am undertaking a little work for the Society now!'

"'Where?'

"'In Cumberland. Ever been there?'

"I nodded. Leethwaite was very much at his ease.

"'Been to Helvore?'

"I knew by instinct he would mention the place.

"He thought I looked ill, and told me I had been overdoing it.

"'It is merely a case of "flu,"' I assured him. 'I had it six weeks
ago, and still feel the effects.'

("The woman in the hollow was before me. I saw again her shabby shawl
and the blood round her throat.)

"'There was a murder down there a short time ago.'

"'I heard of it,' I remarked casually. 'It was a wife murder, I
believe.'

"'Yes, just a common wife murder, and the fellow was caught and hanged.'

"'Then why the ghost?'

"'Well, that is the odd part of it,' Leethwaite said slowly, leaning
back in his chair, his long legs stretched out.

"'I have heard from two Helvore residents that screams have been heard
in the wood about twelve o'clock at night. Not the time for practical
jokers, and the Cumberland peasantry are too superstitious to try their
pranks in unsavoury spots. Besides, from what I have heard, the spot
is not only unsavoury, it is singularly uncanny.'

"'They haven't seen anything?' I asked.

"'No, only heard the cries, and they are so terribly realistic that no
one cares to pass the place at night; indeed, it is utterly banned. I
mentioned the case to old Potters--you must have heard of him, he used
to write a lot for the _Gentleman's Magazine_--and he pressed me to go
down and investigate. I agreed; then I thought I would look you up. Do
you remember your pet aversion in the way of ghosts?'

"I nodded. 'Yes, and I still have the aversion. I think locality
exercises strange influence over some minds. The peaceful meadow
scenery holds no lurking horrors in its bosom; but in the lonely
moorlands, full of curiously moulded boulders, one sees, or fancies one
sees, grotesque creatures, odd and ill-defined as their surroundings.
As a child I had a peculiar horror of those tall, odd-shaped boulders,
with sneering faces--featureless, it is true, but sometimes strangely
resembling the faces of humans and animals. I believe the wood may be
haunted by something of this nature--terrible as the trees.'

"'You know the wood?'

"'I do. And I know the trees.'

"Again in my ears the wind rushed, as it had on that memorable night.

"'Will you come with me?'

"Leethwaite eyed me eagerly. The same old affection he had once
entertained for me was, ripening in his eyes; indeed it had always
remained there. Should I go? An irresistible impulse seized me, a
morbid craving to look once more at the blood-stained hollow, to hear
again the wind. I looked out of the window; the sky was cold and grey.
There were rows and rows of chimneys--chimneys everywhere--and an ocean
of dull, uninviting smoke. I began to hate London and to long for the
countless miles of blue sea, and the fresh air of the woods. I assented
though my better judgment would have had me refuse.

"'Yes,' I replied, 'I will go. As to the ghost, it may be there, but it
is not what you think; it is not the apparition of a man. It may be,
in part, like a man, but it is one of those cursed nightmares I have
always had. I shall see it, hear it shriek--and if I drop dead from
fright, you, old man, will be to blame.'

"Leethwaite was an enthusiast, and psychical adventure always allured
him. He would run the risk of my weak heart, he said, and have me with
him.

"A thousand times I prepared to go back on my word; a thousand
tumultuous emotions of some impending disaster rushed through me. I
felt on the border of an abyss, dark and hopeless; I was pushed on by
invisible and unfriendly hands. I knew I must fall; I knew that those
black depths would engulf me eternally. I took the plunge. We talked
over Sedbergh days, and arranged our train to the North. Leethwaite
looked very boyish, I thought, as he rose to go, and stood smiling in
the doorway.

"He was all kindness; I liked him more than ever. And yet, somehow, as
we stood looking at one another, a grey shadow swept around him, and an
icy pang shot through my heart.

       *       *       *       *       *