
"It was night once more, and the moonlight poured in floods from over
the summit of the knoll where the uncanny boulders lay. Every object
stood silhouetted against the dark background. A house, with its white
walls, stood grim and silent; the paths running in various directions
up and alongside the hill were made doubly clear by the whiteness of
the beams that fell on them. There were no swift clouds, no mists to
hide the brilliance of the stars, and it was nearly midnight. The air
was cold, colder than is usual at Helvore, and I shivered. Leethwaite
stood by my side. I glanced apprehensively at him. Why did he stand in
the moonlight? What business had he there? I laughed, but I fear there
was but little mirth in the sound.

"'I wish you would stop that infernal noise,' he said; 'I am pretty
nervous as it is.'

"'All right,' I whispered; 'I won't do it again.'

"But I did, and he edged sharply away from me. I looked over his head.
There was the gaunt tree with the great hands. I fancied once again the
branches were fingers. I told him so.

"'For God's sake, man, keep quiet,' he replied. 'You are enough to
upset any one's nerves.' He looked at his watch for the hundredth time.
'It's close on the hour.'

"I again looked at the trees and listened. Suddenly, although there had
been absolute silence before, I heard a faint breathing sound, a very
gentle murmur. It came from over the distant knoll. At first very soft
and low, but gradually getting louder and louder, it rushed past us
into the wood beyond. I saw once more the great trees rock beneath it;
and again I heard those voices--those of the woman and the man.

"Leethwaite looked ill, very ill, I thought. I touched him on the
arm. 'You are not frightened,' I said; 'you--a member of the New
Supernatural Investigation Society?'

"'Something is going to happen,' he gasped. 'I feel it--I know it. We
shall see the murder--we shall know the secret of death. What is that?'

"Away in the distance the tap-tapping of shoes came through the still
night air. Tap--tap--tap, down the path from the knoll.

"I clutched Leethwaite by the arm. 'You think you will see the murder,
do you? And the murderer!'

"Leethwaite didn't answer. His breath came in gasps; he looked about
him like a man at bay.

"'And the murderer! Ha! It comes from there. See, it is looking at us
from those trees. It is all arms and legs; it has no human face. It
will drop to the earth, and then we shall see what happens.'

"Tap, tap, tap--the steps grew louder--nearer and nearer they came.
The great shadows stole down, one by one, to meet them. I looked at
Leethwaite. He was fearfully expectant; so was I.

"A woman came tripping along the path. I knew her in an instant--there
was the shabby shawl, the basket on her arm--it was the same. She
approached the wicket.

"I looked at Leethwaite. He was spellbound with fear. I touched his
arm. I dragged him with me. 'Come,' I whispered, 'we shall see which
of us is right. You think the ghostly murderer will resemble us--will
resemble men. It will not. Come.'

"I dragged him forward. He would have fled, but I was firm. We passed
through the gate--we followed the figure as it silently glided on. We
turned to the left. The place grew very dark as the trees met overhead.
I heard the trickling of water and knew we were close to the ditch.

"I gazed intently at the pines. When would the horror drop from them? A
sickly terror laid hold of me. I turned to fly.

"To my surprise Leethwaite stopped me. He was all excitement. 'Wait,'
he hissed. 'Wait. It is you who are afraid. Hark! It is twelve
o'clock.' And as he spoke, the clock of the parish church slowly tolled
midnight. Then the end came. An awful scream rang out; so piercing
and so full of terror that I felt the blood in my heart stand still.
But no figure dropped from the pines. Not from the pines, but from
behind the woman a form darted forward and seized her by the neck. It
tore at her throat with its hands, it dragged and hurried her into the
moonlight; and then, oh damning horror, I saw its face!--it was my own."

