A DERBYSHIRE HAUNTING


Some few years ago, two men were trudging along a road, not twenty
miles from Sudbury, swearing heartily. It was not the first time they
had sworn, not by any means, but it is extremely doubtful if either of
them had ever sworn before quite so vehemently. There were, one must
admit, extenuating circumstances. Having missed the last train, they
were obliged to walk home, a distance of twelve or more miles, and
having been overtaken by a rainstorm, they were soaked to the skin.
True, the rain had now ceased, but as they had covered only six miles,
they still had six more to go, and at every step they took, the water
in their boots soaked through their socks and squished between their
toes. Just as they arrived at a spot where the road swerved a little
to their left and took a sudden dip, a clock from a distance solemnly
chimed twelve.

The younger of the two men came to a halt and lighted his pipe. "Hold
on a minute, Brown," he shouted; "I can't keep up this infernal pace
any longer. Let's take an easy."

Brown turned and joined his companion, who had seated himself on a
wooden gate. Below them, in the dip, the darkness was sepulchral. The
hedges on either side the road were of immense height; and high above
them rose the trunks of giant pines and larches, the intertwining
branches of which formed an archway that completely obliterated the
sky. A faint speck of light from afar flickered occasionally, as if
through a gap in the foliage; but, apart from this, the men could see
nothing--nothing but blackness.

"A cheerful spot!" Brown remarked, "as gloomy a bit of road as I've
ever seen. And how quiet!"

The other man blew his nose. "Not so quiet now," he laughed, "but how
everything echoes! What's that? Water?"

Both men looked, and, apparently, from the other side of the hedge,
came the gentle gurgle of quick flowing water.

"Must be a spring," Brown observed, "flowing into some stream in
the hollow. The darkness suggests the Styx. A match, if you please,
Reynolds."

Reynolds gave him one, and for awhile the two men puffed away in
silence.

Suddenly something whizzed overhead; and they heard the prolonged,
dismal hooting of an owl.

"This is getting a bit too eerie, even for my liking, Brown," Reynolds
remarked; "supposing we move on. I always associate noises like that
with a death."

"I wish it were my mother-in-law's," Brown laughed, "or my own. But
there's no such luck. I'm cold."

"So am I," Reynolds replied. "Deuced cold! Come on, do!"

He slid off the gate as he spoke and strode into the centre of the road.

The moon, temporarily unveiled, revealed as wet a landscape as one
could possibly imagine. Everything dripped water--bushes, trees, ferns,
grass, hats, clothes--whilst every rut of the road, every particle of
soil, shone wet in the moon's rays. A deep, settled calm permeated the
atmosphere. It was the stillness of night and moisture combined.

"What's the matter? Aren't you coming?" Brown asked impatiently.

"One moment," Reynolds replied. "I believe I heard footsteps. Hark! I
thought so, they're coming this way! Someone else lost their train,
perhaps."

Brown listened, and he, too, distinctly heard the sound of
footsteps--high-heeled shoes walking along with a sharp, springy
action, as if the road were absolutely hard and dry.

"A woman!" he ejaculated. "Odd hour for a woman to be out here."

Brown laughed. "Pooh!" he said. "Women are afraid of nothing nowadays
except old age. Hullo! Here she comes!"

As he spoke the figure of a woman--slight and supple, and apparently
young--shot into view, and came rapidly towards them.

Her dress, though quaint and pretty, was not particularly striking;
but her feet, clad in patent leather shoes, with buckles that shone
brightly in the moonlight, were oddly conspicuous, in spite of the
fact that they were small and partially hidden 'neath a skirt which
was long and frilled, and not at all in accordance with the present
fashion. Something about her prevented both men from speaking, and they
involuntarily moved nearer to one another as she approached. On and on
she came, tripping along, and never varying her pace. Now in a zone of
moonlight, now in the dark belt of shadows from the firs and larches,
she drew nearer and nearer. Through the hedge, Brown could dimly
perceive the figure of a cow, immensely magnified, standing dumb and
motionless, apparently lost, like he was, in spellbound observation.
The silence kept on intensifying. Not a breath of air, not a leaf
stirring, not a sound from Reynolds, who stood with arms folded like a
statue; only the subdued trickle, trickle of the spring, and the hard
tap, tap, tap of the flashing, sparkling shoes.

At last the woman was abreast of them. They shrank back and back,
pressing farther and farther into the hedge, so close that the sharp
twigs and brambles scratched their faces and tore their clothes. She
passed. Down, down, down, still tripping daintily, until the sepulchral
blackness of the dip swallowed her up. They could still hear her tap,
tap, tap; and for some seconds neither spoke. Then Reynolds, releasing
his clothes from the thorns, muttered huskily: "At last I've seen a
ghost, and I always scoffed at them."

"But her head!" Brown ejaculated, "where was it?"

"Don't ask me," Reynolds replied, his teeth chattering. "She had no
head. At least I didn't see any. Dare you go on?"

"What, down there?" Brown said, nodding in the direction of the dip.

"Well, we must, if we are to get home to-night," Reynolds retorted,
"and I'm frozen."

"Wait till that noise ceases, then," Brown answered. "I can't stand
seeing a thing like that twice in one night."

They stood still and listened, until the tapping gradually died away in
the far distance, and the only sound to be heard was that of the water,
the eternal, never ceasing, never varying sound of the water. Then they
ran--ran as they had never run since long ago Rugby days--down through
the inky darkness of the hollow and out--far out into the brightness of
the great stretch of flat country beyond; and, all the time they ran,
they neither looked to the right nor to the left, but always on the
ground just ahead of them.

       *       *       *       *       *