
For a week the horror of what they had seen was so great that neither
of the two men could bear to be alone in the dark; and they kept
a light in their respective rooms all night. Then a strange thing
happened. Brown became infatuated, he did nothing but rave, all day,
about the ghost. She had the prettiest figure, the whitest hands, the
daintiest feet he had ever seen, and he was sure her face must be
equally lovely. Why couldn't he see it? There was nothing about the
neck to show she had been decapitated, and yet the head was missing.
Why?

He worried Reynolds to death about it, and he gave no one else
any peace. That waist, those delicate white fingers, those rosy,
almond-shaped nails, those scintillating shoe buckles! They got on his
brain. They obsessed him. He was like a maniac.

At last, at the suggestion of Reynolds, who wanted to get rid of
him for awhile, he came up to London and paid visits to most of the
professional mediums and occultists in the West End.

Some advised him one thing, and some another. Some immediately went
into trances and learned from their controlling spirits all about the
headless phantom, who she was, why she paraded the high road, and
what had become of her head. But it was significant that no two told
him alike, and that the head he so longed to see had at least a dozen
different hiding-places. At last, when he had expended quite a small
fortune, and his brain was much addled with psychic nomenclature,
with detailed accounts of the Astral Plane, Karmas, Elementals,
Elementaries, White Lodges, and What not, he interviewed a woman,
living somewhere in the Bayswater direction, who suggested that he
should hold a séance in the haunted hollow, and who promised, with a
great show of condescension, to act as his medium if he would pay her
the trifling sum of twenty pounds.

At first Brown declared the thing impossible, since he did not, at
that moment, possess twenty pounds, which was literally true; but the
prospect of seeing the ghost's face at length proved too much for him,
and he decided to pawn all he had, in order to gratify his longing.

He closed with the offer. When the night fixed for the séance arrived,
the weather conditions were all that could be desired; the air was soft
and calm, the moon brilliant, the sky almost cloudless, and promising
only the finest weather for days to come. As the medium insisted upon
a party of at least four, Brown persuaded a Mr. and Mrs. de Roscovi,
Russians, to come, and they all set out together from Sudbury shortly
after ten o'clock. Brown had made many inquiries in the neighbourhood
as to the phantom figure, but he had only come across two people who
would tell him anything about it. One, a farmer, assured him that he
had on several occasions seen the ghost when driving, and that, on each
occasion, it had kept abreast of his horse, even though the latter was
careering along the road half mad with fright. But what terrified him
most, he said, was that the apparition had no head.

The other, a blacksmith, said he had seen the woman twice, and that
each time he had seen her she had been carrying something tucked under
her arm, which he had fancied was a head. But he had been too scared
to look at it very closely, and he only knew for certain that where
her head should have been there was nothing. Both he and the farmer
said they had heard all their lives that the road was haunted, but for
what reason they had never been able to discover, as within the past
sixty years, at any rate, neither murder nor suicide was known to have
taken place near the hollow. This is as far as Brown had got with his
investigations when he set out from Sudbury on the night in question.
The de Roscovis did not think, for one moment, that the ghost would
appear. They said, few people apparently had seen it; its visits in
all probability were only periodical; and weeks, months, or even years
might elapse before it put in an appearance there again.

"That may be, but then we have a medium," Brown argued. "I engaged her
to invoke the ghost, provided it would not come of its own accord. You
can invoke it, can't you, Madame Valenspin?"

Madame Valenspin now seemed rather dubious. "I have never tried in the
open before," she said, with a slight shiver, "but I will do my best.
The conditions seem favourable; but I can't say definitely till we
arrive at the exact spot."

Brown, however, could not help observing that the farther they advanced
into the country, which became more and more lonely, the more restless
and uneasy Madame Valenspin grew.

Once or twice she halted, as if irresolute whether to go on or not, and
the moment she caught sight of the hollow she came to a dead stop.

"Not down there," she said. "It's too dark. We'd better stay here."

It was frightfully still. Brown listened for the murmuring of water.
There was none. The recent hot sun had probably dried up the spring.
Through the same gap in the hedge he saw a big cow--possibly, so he
thought, the same cow--and he took it as a favourable augury for the
appearance of the ghost that the animal, as before, was gazing fixedly
into the open space, as if momentarily expecting to see something.

Behind it, away back in the broad expanse of field, were other cattle,
their skins startlingly white; all motionless, and all in attitudes
suggestive of a sense of anticipation, of a conscious waiting for
something. The sepulchral hush was uninterrupted saving by bats,
assuredly the biggest and blackest Brown had ever seen, wheeling and
skimming, with the faintest perceptible whiz, whiz, whiz, in and out
the larches; and the soft intermittent fanning of the leaves as the
night breeze came rustling over the flat country and continued its
career down into the hollow. A rabbit scurried across the road from one
gate to another, its white breast shining silver, and some other small
furry creature, of a species undetected, created a brief pandemonium in
a neighbouring ditch. Otherwise all nature was extraordinarily passive.

"The figure went right down into the hollow," Brown said. "I think we
ought to try there. What do you think, Mrs. de Roscovi?"

"I am of the same opinion as Madame Valenspin," Mrs. de Roscovi
replied, glancing apprehensively at the dip. "I think we had far better
stay where we are."

"Very well, then," Brown said, "let's begin. You are mistress of the
ceremonies, Madame Valenspin. Will you tell us what to do?"

Madame Valenspin moved to one side of the road, and stood with her back
resting against a gate. "Keep quite close to me," she said, "and I
will try and go under control. Ah!" She ejaculated the last syllable
so sharply that Brown and Mrs. de Roscovi both started. She then began
to mumble something, and then, breaking into a shrill, high-pitched
key, stated that she was no longer Madame Valenspin but a spirit called
Anne Heathcote, who was her temporary control. Anne Heathcote, so the
audience were informed, was the ghost of a girl of very great beauty,
who had been murdered in an adjoining field, close on a hundred years
ago. There was no apparent motive for the deed, which was accomplished
in a peculiarly barbarous fashion, the head being cut right off and
thrown in a pit that had long since been filled in. The criminal was
never caught.

"Can't you appear to us with your head on," Brown asked, "just as you
were in your lifetime?"

"No," the alleged spirit replied. "I am forbidden to do so. My visits
are only periodical, and I shan't be able to materialise again here for
at least ten years."

"Then there is little hope of my ever seeing you," Brown said, bitterly
disappointed.

"None," was the somewhat abrupt answer.

"But why should you haunt this place at all?" Mr. de Roscovi asked.
"What reason is there for your being earth-bound?"

"My sins," the control replied. "I was a very wicked girl."

"I don't care whether you were wicked or not," Brown put in mournfully.
"I want to see you. If your face is in keeping with your limbs and
figure, it must indeed be lovely. Is there no way of seeing you--just
for a second?"

"None," the control answered. Then, with much more emphasis, "None."

But hardly had the alleged Anne Heathcote spoken, when far away in the
distance came the sound of footsteps. Tap, tap, tap!

"Why! By Jove!" Brown shouted, "there she is! I recognise her step. I
should know it in a million."

For a minute everyone was silent, the tapping growing more and more
audible. Then Madame Valenspin, in quite her own voice, exclaimed
excitedly: "Let us be going. The spirits tell me we mustn't remain here
any longer. Let's go back by the fields."

She fumbled with the latchet of the gate, against which she had been
leaning, and hurriedly tried to raise it.

Mrs. de Roscovi said nothing, but gripped her husband by the arm. The
steps approached rapidly, and presently the same dainty form, Brown had
previously seen when with Reynolds, once more figured on the horizon.

"It is--it is she!" Brown whispered. "Look--the waist, the arms, the
hands, the shoes. Silver buckles! How they flash!"

An exclamation of horror interrupted him. It was from Mr. de Roscovi.
He had moved to one side of the road, dragging his wife with him, and
the two were standing huddled together, their eyes fixed in a frenzied
stare at the phantom's neck. Brown, forcing his attention away from
the long slim hands which so fascinated him, followed their glances.
The neck was not as he remembered it, white and slender as far as it
went, but it ended abruptly in a grey nothingness, and beyond this
nothingness Brown fancied he discerned the dimmest of shadows. He
was appalled but fascinated, and intense curiosity far outweighed
his fear. He was certain she was beautiful--beautiful to a degree
that immeasurably excelled any feminine loveliness he had hitherto
encountered. He must see her face. He did not believe her head was
missing; he believed it was there on her body right enough, but that
for some specific reason it had not materialised. He turned to Madame
Valenspin to inquire the cause, and was greatly astonished to see her
beating a hasty retreat across the fields. The figure had now come up
to where he was standing, and tripping past him, it sped swiftly down
the dip. Brown at once gave chase. He had not gone many yards before
the darkness of the dip was on him; and the only clue he had to his
quarry's whereabouts was the sound of the shoes--the constant tap,
tap, tapping. On and on he went, however, and at length, emerging from
the darkness, he perceived a wooden stile and beyond it a tiny path,
threading its way through a clump of firs that gradually grew thinner
and thinner till they finally terminated in what appeared to be a broad
clearing. Mounting the stile and springing off on the other side, the
woman tripped along the path, and, turning for a moment to beckon
Brown, disappeared from view.

The intense loneliness of the spot, emphasised a thousandfold by the
eerie effect of the few straggling moonbeams that fell aslant the
stile and pathway, and the knowledge that he had left his companions
far behind made Brown falter, and it was some seconds before he could
gather up the courage to continue his pursuit. A light girlish laugh,
however, proceeding apparently from the spot where the figure had
vanished, determined him. He saw once again vividly before him that
willowy waist, those slim, delicate fingers, and those coquettish
little feet. Were the devil itself to bar his way he must see her
face. Sweating with terror, and yet withal obsessed with a passion
that defies description, Brown mounted the stile and hastened in the
direction of the laugh. Again it rang out, charged to overflowing with
innocent fun and frolic, irresistibly girlish, irresistibly coy. This
time there was no mistaking its locality. It came from behind a small
clump of trees that bordered on the clearing. Wild with excitement and
full of love madness, Brown dashed round the clump, and then halted.
Floating in mid-air was a head, a head that looked as if it had long
since been buried and just disinterred. The eyes alone lived, and they
were fixed on Brown's with a mocking, baneful glitter. Hanging on
either side of it was a mass of long fair hair, suggestive of a woman.

Every detail in the face stood out with hideous clearness in the
brilliancy of the moonlight, and as Brown stared at it, petrified with
horror, the thing laughed.



