A CASE OF HAUNTINGS NEAR BIRMINGHAM


People often wonder why new houses--houses without any apparent
history--should suddenly begin to be haunted, often by a variety of
very alarming phenomena, and then, just as suddenly, perhaps, cease to
be haunted.

Of course one can only theorise, but I think a very possible and
feasible reason is suggested, in the case I am about to relate.

Five years ago Sir George Cookham was living at "The Mayfields," a
large country house some ten or twelve miles south-east of Birmingham.
He was greatly interested in criminology, inclining to the belief that
crime is almost entirely due to physical malformation; and used to
invite all the great experts on the subject to stay with him. It was
one week-end, towards the middle of September, that Dr. Sickertorft
came; and he and Sir George had some very heated arguments. Sir George
was one of the most eccentric men I have ever met, and one of his many
idiosyncrasies was to carry on his discussions walking.

On the morning of Sickertorft's departure he and Sir George were
arguing--Sir George, at the same time, perambulating the corridor of
the ground floor of the house, for about the hundredth time--when Dr.
Sickertorft suddenly remarked: "I wonder if this house is haunted?"

"Haunted!" Sir George laughed. "Why, of course not. It's new. My father
built it only sixty years ago. A house to be haunted must be old, must
have some history. And the only tragedy that has occurred here was when
a servant I once had, losing control of his temper, killed one of my
most valuable dogs. That was a tragedy, both for the servant and the
dog. There has been nothing else to my knowledge--nothing beyond one or
two quite peaceful deaths from natural causes. But why do you ask?"

"Because," Sickertorft replied, "that cupboard over there, opposite
the foot of the stairs, to me, strongly suggests a ghost. Something
peculiarly diabolical. Something that springs out on one and imparts
the sensation of being strangled."

"The only ghosts that haunt that cupboard," Sir George chuckled, "are
boots and shoes, and, I believe, my fishing rods. Ghosts are all a
delusion--a peculiar state of the brain due to some minute osseous
depression or cerebral inflammation."

"I don't agree with you," Sickertorft said quietly. "I am positively
certain that there are such things as ghosts, that they are objective
and of many kinds. Some, in all probability, have always existed,
and have never inhabited any human body; some are the earth-bound
spiritual egos of man and beast; and some we can create ourselves."

"Create ghosts!" Sir George cried. "Come, now, we are talking sense. Of
course we can create ghosts. Pepper did, Maskelyne and Devant still do,
and so do all the so-called materialising mediums."

"I don't mean spoof ghosts," Sickertorft responded. "I mean real ones.
Real superphysical, objective phenomena. Man can at times create them,
but only by intense concentration."

"You mean materialised thought forms?"

"If you like to term them such," Sickertorft replied. "I believe they
are responsible for a certain percentage of hauntings, but not all."

"Well, I've never seen any of your ghostly thought forms nor, in my
opinion, am I ever likely to," Sir George growled. "Show me one and
I'll believe. But you can't."

"I don't know so much," Sickertorft muttered, and, with his eyes still
on the cupboard, he followed Sir George into his study.

       *       *       *       *       *