HERNE THE HUNTER.


The story of Herne the Hunter was familiar in Shakespeare’s days, as
those who have read “The Merry Wives of Windsor” know; but like all
old stories it has many versions, and some say that Herne lived in
Plantagenet times, others as recently as Good Queen Bess’ reign; some,
that he was a poacher, others, a keeper. But all agree that he haunted
Windsor Forest, and some say that he does so to this day.

As the legend is generally told Herne was a royal keeper whose unusual
skill at the chase caused him to become a great favourite of his royal
master, and at the same time made his fellow foresters mighty jealous
of him. So they combined together to try to plot his undoing.

To one of their secret councils, held beneath great oaks in the heart
of the forest, there came one day a mysterious dark man of unusual
stature and strength, whose face seemed familiar yet whom none could
place. To their enquiries he answered gruffly that he lived on the
outskirts of the forest, and that he knew their designs and could help
them, if they wished it.

The jealous keepers at once accepted his offer. But he bargained with
them, asking as the price of his aid that they should each grant
one request whenever it was made. This was agreed, and the stranger
disappeared, telling the now rather alarmed foresters that they should
soon have proof of his powers.

Within a few days it was noticed that Herne’s skill began to fail him.
He could no longer shoot straight, nor ride fast; and very swiftly he
fell into disfavour. His rivals were delighted, particularly when the
day came that he was dismissed from the Royal service.

That same night there was a terrible thunderstorm, and in the morning
the body of Herne was found hanging from a lightning-stricken tree in
the Little Park. He had killed himself.

For a time nothing unusual happened; then strange stories began to get
about of a ghostly huntsman, in figure like the dead Herne, with stag’s
horns growing from his head, who rode through the forest at night on a
fierce black charger, harrying the King’s deer. This proved to be only
too true as the depleted herds of deer soon proved, and the keepers
were threatened with dire punishment if the depredations were not
stopped.

The keepers, greatly alarmed, went the next night to Herne’s oak to see
if the story were true; and there they were met by the dark stranger.
But now there was no doubt as to his identity. He appeared in a flash
of sulphurous flame, and they knew him to be the Evil One. He told the
terrified men that Herne would appear to them soon, and that they must
do exactly what he bade them do, otherwise he would seize their souls.

Soon Herne appeared, a ghostly figure with huge antlers, and commanded
his fellow-keepers to assemble at the oak the next midnight with horses
and hounds equipped for the chase. They had to obey, and night after
night, led by the ghostly huntsman, the party swept through the forest.

Their wild doings naturally quickly reached the ears of the King, and
he summoned the keepers, demanding an explanation. In terror they
confessed how they had plotted Herne’s ruin, and the King, furious at
their impious action, caused all of them to be hanged upon Herne’s oak.

But the ghostly chase still went on, they say, and even to this day in
the dark midnight hours some people believe you may hear, far away
in the Great Park, the distant sound of a huntsman’s horn, and see
flashing through the trees the ghostly chase led by an antlered man on
a huge black horse.

Herne’s oak has gone now. It stood in the Home Park, a grim withered
riven stump near the footpath to Datchet, until some fifty or sixty
years ago; and few cared to pass it at midnight.

But Windsor Park in daytime has nothing eerie about it. It, and the
wide bracken-covered, sandy forest country that surrounds it, is
delightful in Spring, or on a hot summer’s day. Or in autumn, when
the leaves and bracken are turning, one must go far to find a more
beautiful district. The whole country is steeped in history and romance.

From Windsor, with its magnificent castle--and just across the river,
historic Eton--the forest district stretches away south and west for
miles. Here, although so close to London, one may find the solitude and
rest that many travel far afield to seek--and fail to find.

[Illustration: _Windsor Forest._]




[Illustration: Ghost of a lady reaching for a floating basin, in a
paneled chamber.]
