The following remarkable occurrence of the Spectral Appearances of two
persons, one recently dead and the other a canonized saint of the Roman
Catholic Church, which occurred about thirty years ago, is now published
for the first time. It is known as "The Weld Ghost Story:"--

"Philip Weld was a younger son of Mr. James Weld of Archer's Lodge, near
Southampton, and a nephew of the late Cardinal Weld, the head of that
ancient family, whose chief seat is Lulworth Castle in Dorsetshire.[13] He
was sent by his father in 1844 to S. Edmund's college, near Ware in
Hertfordshire, for his education. He was a boy of great piety and virtue,
and gave not only satisfaction to the masters of studies, but edification
to all his fellow-students. It happened that on April 16, 1846, a play-day
or whole holiday, the President of the college gave the boys leave to boat
upon the river at Ware.

"In the morning of that day Philip Weld had been to the Holy Communion at
the early celebration of Mass, having just finished his retreat. In the
afternoon of the same day he went with his companions and some of the
masters to boat on the river as arranged. This sport he enjoyed very much.
When one of the masters remarked that it was time to return to the
college, Philip asked whether they might not have one more row. The master
consented, and they rowed to the accustomed turning-point. On arriving
there, and in turning the boat, Philip accidentally fell out into a very
deep part of the river; and, notwithstanding that every effort was made to
save him, was drowned.

"His dead body was brought back to the college, and the Very Rev. Dr.
Cox, the President, was immensely shocked and grieved. He was very fond of
Philip; but what was most dreadful to him was to have to break this sad
news to the boy's parents. He scarcely knew what to do, whether to write
by post, or to send a messenger. At last he determined to go himself to
Mr. Weld at Southampton. So he set off the same evening, and, passing
through London, reached Southampton the next day, and drove from thence to
Archer's Lodge, Mr. Weld's residence.

"On arriving there and being shown into his private study, Dr. Cox found
Mr. Weld in tears. The latter, rising from his seat and taking the doctor
by the hand, said, 'My dear sir, you need not tell me what you are come
for. I know it already. Philip is dead. Yesterday I was walking with my
daughter Katharine on the turnpike road, in broad daylight, and Philip
appeared to us both. He was standing on the causeway with another young
man in a black robe by his side. My daughter was the first to perceive
him. She said to me, "Look there, papa: there is Philip." I looked and saw
him. I said to my daughter, "It is Philip, indeed; but he has the look of
an angel." Not suspecting that he was dead, though greatly wondering that
he was there, I went towards him with my daughter to embrace him; but a
few yards being between us, while I was going up to him a labouring man,
who was walking on the same causeway, passed between the apparition and
the hedge, and as he went on I saw him pass through their apparent bodies,
as if they were transparent. On perceiving this I at once felt sure that
they were spirits, and going forward with my daughter to touch them,
Philip sweetly smiled on us, and then both he and his companion vanished
away.'"

"The reader may imagine how deeply affected Dr. Cox was on hearing this
remarkable statement. He of course corroborated it by relating to the
afflicted father the circumstances attendant on his son's death, which had
taken place at the very hour in which he appeared to his father and
sister. They all concluded that he had died in the grace of God, and that
he was in happiness, because of the placid smile on his face.[14]

"Dr. Cox asked Mr. Weld who the young man was in the black robe who had
accompanied his son, and who appeared to have a most beautiful and angelic
countenance, but he said that he had not the slightest idea.

"A few weeks afterwards, however, Mr. Weld was on a visit to the
neighbourhood of Stonyhurst in Lancashire. After hearing Mass one morning
in the chapel, he, while waiting for his carriage, was shown into the
guest-room, where, walking up to the fireplace, he saw a picture above the
chimney-piece, which, as it pleased God, represented a young man in a
black robe with the very face, form, and attitude of the companion of
Philip as he saw him in the vision, and beneath the picture was inscribed
'S. Stanislaus Kostka,'[15] one of the greatest saints of the Jesuit
order, and the one whom Philip had chosen for his patron saint at his
Confirmation. His father, overpowered with emotion, fell on his knees,
shedding many tears, and thanking God for this fresh proof of his son's
blessedness. For in what better company could he be than in that of his
patron saint, leading him, as it were, into the presence of his Creator
and his Saviour, from the dangers and temptations of this state of exile
to a condition of endless blessedness and happiness?"[16]

This is, perhaps, one of the most remarkable and best-authenticated recent
cases of Spectral Appearances which has ever been narrated. The various
independent testimonies dove-tailing together so perfectly, centre in the
leading supernatural fact--the actual apparition in the daytime of a
person just departed this life by sudden death, seen not by one only, but
by two people, simultaneously; and seen in company with the spirit of a
very holy and renowned saint, the chosen patron of the youth who had just
been drowned. A more clear and conclusive example of the Supernatural it
would be impossible to obtain.
