The following record describes what is known as the "Chester-le-Street"
Apparition:--

"About the year of Our Lord 1632 (as near as I can remember, having lost
my notes and the copy of the letter to Serjeant Hutton, but I am sure that
I do most perfectly remember the substance of the story), near unto
Chester-in-the-Street, there lived one Walker, a yeoman of good estate,
and a widower, who had a young woman to his kinswoman, that kept his
house, who was by the neighbours suspected to be with child, and was,
towards the dark of the evening one night, sent away with one Mark Sharp,
who was a collier, one who digged coals under ground, and one that had
been born at Blackburn hundred in Lancashire; and so she was not heard of
a long time, and no noise, or little, was made about it. In the winter
time after, one James Graham, or Grime, for so in that country they call
them, being a miller, and living about two miles from the place where
Walker lived, was one night alone very late in the mill grinding corn; and
about twelve or one of the clock at night, he came down the stairs from
having been putting corn in the hopper; the mill doors being shut, there
stood a woman upon the midst of the floor, with her hair about her head,
hanging down and all bloody, with five large wounds on her head. He being
much affrighted and amazed began to bless himself;[1] and at last asked
her who she was, and what she wanted. To which she said, 'I am the spirit
of such a woman who lived with Walker, and being got with child by him,
he promised to send me to a private place, where I should be well-looked
to, till I was brought to bed, and well again; and then I should come
again and keep his house. And, accordingly,' said the apparition, 'I was
one night sent away with one Mark Sharp, who, upon a moor (naming a place
that the miller knew) slew me with a pick, such as men dig coals withal
and gave me these five wounds, and after threw my body into a coal-pit
hard by, and hid the pick under a bank; and his shoes and stockings being
bloody, he endeavoured to wash them; but seeing the blood would not forth,
he hid them there.' And the apparition further told the miller that he
must be the man to reveal it, or else that she must still appear and haunt
him. The miller returned home very sad and heavy, but spoke not one word
of what he had seen, but eschewed as much as he could to stay in the mill
within night without company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing again
of that frightful apparition. But notwithstanding, one night when it began
to be dark, the apparition met him again and seemed very fierce and cruel,
and threatened him that if he did not reveal the murder she would
continually pursue and haunt him; yet, for all this, he still concealed it
until S. Thomas' Eve before Christmas; when being soon after sunset
walking in his garden, she appeared again, and then so threatened him, and
affrighted him, that he promised faithfully to reveal it next morning. In
the morning he went to a magistrate, and made the whole matter known with
all the circumstances; and diligent search being made, the body was found
in a coal-pit, with five wounds in the head, and the pick and shoes and
stockings yet bloody; in every circumstance as the apparition had related
unto the miller; whereupon Walker and Mark Sharp were both apprehended,
but would confess nothing. At the assizes following, I think it was at
Durham, they were arraigned, found guilty, condemned and executed; but I
could never hear they confessed the fact. There were some that reported
the apparition did appear unto the judge, or the foreman of the jury, who
was alive in Chester-in-the-Street about ten years ago, as I have been
credibly informed, but of that I know no certainty. There are many persons
yet alive that can remember this strange murder, and the discovery of it;
for it was, and sometimes yet is, as much discoursed of in the north
country, as anything that almost hath ever been heard of, and the relation
printed, though now not to be gotten. I relate this with the greater
confidence (though I may fail in some of the circumstances) because I saw
and read the letter that was sent to Serjeant Hutton, who then lived at
Goldsburgh in Yorkshire, from the judge before whom Walker and Mark Sharp
were tried, and by whom they were condemned, and had a copy of it until
about the year 1658, when I had it and many other books and papers taken
from me; and this I confess to be one of the most convincing stories,
being of undoubted verity, that ever I read, heard, or knew of, and
carrieth with it the most evident force to make the most incredulous
spirit to be satisfied that there are really, sometimes, such things as
apparitions.--William Lumley."[2]

The above account, in which the object of the Spectral Appearance is
obvious enough, is taken from the well-known "History of Durham," by that
celebrated antiquarian the late Mr. Robert Surtees. It needs no comment,
telling as it does so well, in quaint but plain language, its own
remarkable story.
