The following Account of the Apparition of a murdered man, near the place
of his death, is very remarkable. It has been published, though in another
form, in Australia, and is there generally accepted as true. The version
given below is from those who are thoroughly competent to furnish a true
and faithful account of a very impressive narrative:--

"In Australia, about twenty-five years ago, two graziers, who had
emigrated from England, and entered into partnership, became, as was
generally believed, possessed of considerable property, by an unlooked-for
success in their precarious but not unprofitable occupation. One of them
all of a sudden was missed, and could nowhere be found. Search was made
for him in every quarter, likely and unlikely, yet no tidings of him or
his whereabouts could be heard.

"One evening, about three weeks afterwards, his partner and companion was
returning to his hut along a bye-path which skirted a deep and broad sheet
of water. The shadows of twilight were deepening, and the setting sun was
almost shut out by the tall shrubs, brushwood, and rank grass which grew
so thick and wild. In a moment he saw the crouching figure of his
companion, apparently as real and life-like as could be, sitting on the
ground by the very margin of the deep pond, with his left arm bent,
resting on his left knee. He was about to rush forward and speak, when the
figure seemed to grow less distinct, and the ashen-coloured face wore an
unusually sad and melancholy aspect; so he paused. On this the figure,
becoming again more palpable, raised its right arm, and, holding down the
index finger of the right hand, pointed to a dark and deep hole, where the
water was still and black, immediately beside an overhanging tree. This
action was deliberately done, and then twice repeated, after which the
figure, growing more and more indistinct, seemed to fade away.

"The grazier was mortally terrified and alarmed. For a while he stood
riveted to the spot, fearing either to go forward or backward; while the
silence of evening and the strange solitude, now for the first time in
his Australian life thoroughly experienced, overawed him completely.
Afterwards he turned and went home. Night, which came on soon, brought him
no sleep. He was restless, agitated, and disquieted.

"The next morning, in company with others, the pool was dragged, and the
body of his partner discovered, in the very spot towards which the figure
of the phantom had twice pointed. It had been weighted and weighed down by
a large stone attached to the body; while from the same spot was recovered
a kind of axe or hatchet, with which the murder had evidently been
committed. This was identified as having belonged to a certain adventurer,
who, on being taxed and formally charged with the murder, and found to be
possessed of certain valuable documents belonging to the murdered man,
eventually confessed his crime, and was executed.

"This incident, and its supernatural occurrences, made a deep impression;
and, having been abundantly testified to, in a court of justice, as well
as in common and general conversation, is not likely to be soon forgotten
in the neighbourhood of Ballarat, in Australia, where it occurred."

Here, of course, the purpose of the Apparition was obvious enough; and the
end attained was as just and proper as it was true and righteous; for
"whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed."

The following example of the appearance of the spirit of a dying woman to
her children, who were at a distance of some hundreds of miles from her,
is a plain unvarnished narrative of facts. It is now published for the
first time.

"A lady and her husband (who held a position of some distinction in India)
were returning home (A.D. 1854) after an absence of four years, to join a
family of young children, when the former was seized in Egypt with an
illness of a most alarming character; and, though carefully tended by an
English physician and nursed with the greatest care, grew so weak that
little or no hope of her recovery existed. With that true kindness which
is sometimes withheld by those about a dying bed, she was properly and
plainly informed of her dangerous state, and bidden to prepare for the
worst. Of a devout, pious, and reverential mind, she is reported to have
made a careful preparation for her latter end, though no clergyman was at
hand to minister the last sacrament, or to afford spiritual consolation.
The only point which seemed to disturb her mind, after the delirium of
fever had passed away, was a deep-seated desire to see her absent children
once again, which she frequently expressed to those who attended upon her.
Day after day, for more than a week, she gave utterance to her longings
and prayers, remarking that she would die happily if only this one wish
could be gratified.

"On the morning of the day of her departure hence, she fell into a long
and heavy sleep, from which her attendants found it difficult to arouse
her. During the whole period of it she lay perfectly tranquil. Soon after
noon, however, she suddenly awoke, exclaiming, 'I have seen them all: I
have seen them. God be praised for Jesus Christ's sake!' and then slept
again. Towards evening, in perfect peace and with many devout
exclamations, she calmly yielded up her spirit to God Who gave it. Her
body was brought to England, and interred in the family burying-place.

"The most remarkable part of this incident remains to be told. The
children of the dying lady were being educated at Torquay under the
supervision of a friend of the family. At the very time that their mother
thus slept, they were confined to the house where they lived, by a severe
storm of thunder and lightning. Two apartments on one floor, perfectly
distinct, were then occupied by them as play and recreation rooms. All
were there gathered together. No one of the children was absent. They were
amusing themselves with games of chance, books, and toys, in company of a
nursemaid who had never seen their parents. All of a sudden their mother,
as she usually appeared, entered the larger room of the two, pausing,
looked for some moments at each and smiled, passed into the next room, and
then vanished away. Three of the elder children recognized her at once,
but were greatly disturbed and impressed at her appearance, silence, and
manner. The younger and the nursemaid each and all saw a lady in white
come into the smaller room, and then slowly glide by and fade away."

The date of this occurrence, September 10, 1854, was carefully noted, and
it was afterwards found that the two events above recorded happened almost
contemporaneously. A record of the event was committed to paper, and
transcribed on a fly-leaf of the family Bible, from which the above
account was taken and given to the Editor of this book in the autumn of
the year 1871, by a relation of the lady in question, who is well
acquainted with the fact of her spectral appearance at Torquay, and has
vouched for the truth of it in the most distinct and formal manner. The
husband, who was reported to have been of a somewhat sceptical habit of
mind, was deeply impressed by the occurrence. And though it is seldom
referred to now, it is known to have had a very deep and lasting religious
effect on more than one person who was permitted directly to witness
it.[19]
