A personal acquaintance of the Editor, whom he has had the pleasure of
knowing for twenty years, most kindly furnishes the following example:--

"In the winter of 1872-3 I was afflicted with a long and severe illness,
so severe indeed, that for six weeks I was hovering between life and
death. A nurse of great knowledge and intelligence was in attendance on
me; she had been brought up as a Socinian, and was entirely careless as to
religious belief. At the same time she was wholly devoted to her duties,
and most attentive and assiduous in the same. Two days after her arrival
she was sitting up in the adjoining room, the folding-doors between which
and the room where I was lying being open, and lights were burning in each
apartment. It had struck two o'clock a.m., and from my critical position
she was unwilling either to sleep or to secure temporary rest. On looking
up at that moment she perceived a form bending over me. The figure was
that of an aged person with attenuated features, straggling grey hair, and
thin clasped hands, which were placed in the attitude of prayer. For a
while she thought it was someone who had entered the room; but, after
gazing at it intently, she was smitten with a strange awe, and stood
watching it attentively for at least five minutes, when it gradually faded
away and disappeared.

"On the first opportunity she mentioned this strange occurrence to the
people of the house, when she heard for the first time that my father had
been lying dangerously ill at his own residence, more than a hundred
miles away. At the time of my own and my father's sickness, my dangerous
state, for medical and prudential reasons, was not communicated to him,
and my illness was made light of, fearing the bad effect upon himself.
That it was his Spirit which then appeared seems undoubted: for at two
o'clock p.m. a relation came to see me from the City where my father had
lived, to break to me the sad news of his decease. He had departed this
life exactly at the period when his apparition in the attitude of prayer
had been seen by my attendant. These facts were not made known to me until
some time afterwards."[20]
