The following story, no less interesting and impressive, appears in "The
Life and Times of Lord Brougham, written by Himself," published a few
years ago by Messrs. Blackwood and Co.:--

"'A most remarkable thing happened to me--so remarkable that I must tell
the story from the beginning. After I left the High School [in Edinburgh],
I went with G----, my most intimate friend, to attend the classes in the
University. There was no divinity class, but we frequently in our walks
discussed and speculated upon many grave subjects--among others, on the
immortality of the soul, and on a future state. This question and the
possibility, I will not say of ghosts walking, but of the dead appearing
to the living, were subjects of much speculation; and we actually
committed the folly of drawing up an agreement, written with our blood, to
the effect that whichever of us died first should appear to the other, and
thus solve any doubts we had entertained of the "life after death." After
we had finished our classes at the College, G---- went to India, having
got an appointment there in the Civil Service. He seldom wrote to me, and
after the lapse of a few years I had almost forgotten him; moreover, his
family having little connection with Edinburgh, I seldom saw or heard
anything of them, or of him through them, so that all the old schoolboy
intimacy had died out and I had nearly forgotten his existence. I had
taken, as I have said, a warm bath; and while in it and enjoying the
comfort of the heat after the late freezing I had undergone, I turned my
head round towards the chair on which I had deposited my clothes, as I was
about to get out of the bath. On the chair sat G----, looking calmly at
me. How I got out of the bath I know not, but on recovering my senses I
found myself sprawling on the floor. The apparition, or whatever it was
that had taken the likeness of G----, had disappeared. The vision produced
such a shock that I had no inclination to talk about it, or to speak about
it even to Stuart; but the impression it made upon me was too vivid to be
easily forgotten; and so strongly was I affected by it, that I have here
written down the whole history with the date, 19th December, and all the
particulars as they are now fresh before me. No doubt I had fallen asleep;
and that the appearance presented so distinctly to my eyes was a dream, I
cannot for a moment doubt, yet for years I had had no communication with
G----, nor had there been anything to recall him to my recollection;
nothing had taken place during our Swedish travels either connected with
G---- or with India, or with anything relating to him or to any member of
his family. I recollected quickly enough our old discussion, and the
bargain we had made. I could not discharge from my mind the impression
that G---- must have died, and that his appearance to me was to be
received by me as a proof of a future state.' This was on December 19,
1799. In October, 1862, Lord Brougham added as a postscript:--'I have just
been copying out from my journal the account of this strange dream:
certissima mortis imago! And now to finish the story, begun about sixty
years since. Soon after my return to Edinburgh there arrived a letter from
India announcing G----'s death! and stating that he had died on the 19th
of December.'"
