The following example of the apparition of a departed friend is, for
reasons which will be apparent from the narrative, not unlike the three
curious, but independent cases already recorded in the early part of the
present chapter, and not altogether unlike that told by the late Lord
Brougham. It comes directly to the Editor from the pen of the person who
saw the spectral appearance:--

"I was sitting in my library one evening, towards the close of summer,
somewhat late. The shadow of evening had been deepening for some time, for
the sun had long gone down; and the expansive valley beyond and below my
sloping garden was white with mist. Within, beyond the heavy folds of the
curtains which hung beside a single and rather small and open window,
there was a grey darkness which almost enshrouded the corners of the room
on either side. I had been musing and meditating on a variety of subjects,
theological, metaphysical, and moral, for more than an hour; while I
reposed in a low arm-chair on one side of the fire-place.

"All of a sudden I saw what seemed to be an elongated perpendicular cloud
of foggy-looking grey smoke, collected in the right-hand corner of the
room. I could not comprehend what it was. While looking steadily at it,
and rubbing my eyes (doubting for a moment whether I was awake or asleep),
it seemed to form itself, by a kind of circular rolling motion of the
smoke or luminous mist, into a human shape. There, before me, came out
slowly, as it were, face, head, body, arms, hands and feet--at first a
little indistinct in detail, but eventually so self-evident and clear
that it was impossible to doubt the fact--of a figure, which a moment or
two afterwards was developed into the exact and unmistakeable form of an
old fellow-student at Oxford, who had died soon after we left that
university, and of whom I had heard nothing whatever since the day of his
death about seven years previously,[21] to that moment. Appearing just as
he had lived, though death-like and ashen, he looked at me with a fixed
and strangely-vacant stare, which appeared to grow alternately vivid and
piercing, and dull and nebulous. I seemed to feel the air all at once
chill and unearthly; and an indescribable sensation came over me which I
had never experienced either before or afterwards. I felt almost
paralyzed, and yet not altogether terrified. The form of my old college
companion (who had been a very upright, devout and religious man) in a
moment smiled at me, and raising his hand, pointed for a few seconds
upwards. At this action a very bright mist, not exactly a light, but a
luminous mist, seemed to hover over him. I tried to speak, but could not.
My tongue clave to the roof of my mouth. Then, protecting myself with the
sign of the Cross, and a mental invocation of the Blessed Trinity, I
sheltered my eyes with my right hand for a few seconds, and then looking
up again saw the apparition become more and more indistinct and soon
altogether fade away.

"This is my ghost story, and I have always connected the appearance with
arguments and conversations which, against aggressive objectors, used to
be held at Oxford in defence of the Christian doctrines of the
Resurrection of the Body and the Immortality of the Soul, in which my dead
friend took so intelligent and earnest a part."
