CHAPTER VII.

HAUNTED HOUSES AND LOCALITIES.


Many who are unaffected by the demoralizing and degrading materialistic
theories of life, which are now enunciated by some who name themselves,
and whom their flattering admirers style "philosophers," will not be
unwilling to allow that a considerable amount of evidence[22] is in
existence, indicating that certain localities are troubled by the presence
of evil spirits, who from time to time manifest their powers, or sometimes
appear to mankind in forms which give a shock to those who are enabled or
permitted to perceive them.

If Christian tradition be accepted, a belief in the official ministry of
unfallen spirits,--"the armies of the Living God,"--will be held,
firmly[23] and intelligibly, as a most reasonable and beautiful part of
Almighty God's revelation, Who "has ordained and constituted the services
of angels and men in a wonderful order." So, by consequence, the existence
and action of fallen angels, the Legions of Satan, and of spirits,[24]
who, at the particular judgment following immediately upon death, have
merited the swift and righteous condemnation of an all-just Judge, will be
fully admitted.

The power, activity, and malice of Satan is apparent from numerous
statements in Holy Scripture; and most Christian writers who have dealt
with the subject of evil spirits have maintained that their power and
influence are unquestionably greater in some localities than others. It is
commonly held, that in lonely deserts, on lofty mountains, where the feet
of men seldom tread, as well as in the mines of the earth,[25] and in vast
forests where desolation reigns, the powers of the Devil and his angels,
being unchecked and uncurbed by the positive energizing activity of
Christianity, are vast. So, likewise, the universal instinct of mankind
has maintained that there are certain places in which the appearances of
unquiet or lost souls might be reasonably looked for, rather than in
others. Deserted houses and lonely roads, where crimes of violence and
special wickedness have been perpetrated; deep mines,[26] localities,
unblessed by Holy Church, where the bodies of Christians have been placed
to moulder away, instead of in God's holy acre, the consecrated
churchyard; battlefields, where it may be that so many have been cut off
in deadly sin--

  "Unhouseled, disappointed, unanealed,"

have each and all been regarded as the fitting haunts of disquieted and
wandering spirits.

On this point Southey, in "The Doctor," with much force thus writes:--"The
popular belief that _places_ are haunted where money has been concealed
(as if, where the treasure was and the heart had been, there would the
miserable soul be also), or where some great and undiscovered crime has
been committed, shows how consistent this is with our natural sense of
fitness."

On a collateral detail of this subject (the constant and malignant
activity of evil spirits), Mr. John Wesley, a thorough believer in the
Supernatural, put forth his faith and convictions with singular force and
lucidity, plainly maintaining the reality and importance of all those
explicit statements of Holy Scripture which so directly and practically
bear on the point under treatment.

"Let us consider," wrote Wesley, "what may be the employment of unholy
spirits from death to the resurrection. We cannot doubt but the moment
they leave the body, they find themselves surrounded by spirits of their
own kind, probably human as well as diabolical. What power God may permit
these to exercise over them we do not distinctly know. But it is not
improbable [that] He may suffer Satan to employ them as he does his own
angels, in inflicting death or evils of various kinds on the men that know
not God. For this end they may raise storms by sea or by land; they may
shoot meteors through the air; they may occasion earthquakes; and in
numberless ways afflict those whom they are not suffered to destroy. Where
they are not permitted to take away life, they may inflict various
diseases; and many of these, which we may judge to be natural, are
undoubtedly diabolical. I believe this is frequently the case with
lunatics. It is observable that many of these, mentioned in the Scripture,
who are called 'lunatics' by one of the Evangelists, are termed
'demoniacs' by another. One of the most eminent physicians I ever knew,
particularly in cases of insanity, the late Dr. Deacon, was clearly of
opinion that this was the case with many, if not with most lunatics. And
it is no valid objection to this, that these diseases are so often cured
by natural means; for a wound inflicted by an evil spirit might be cured
as any other, unless that spirit were permitted to repeat the blow. May
not some of these evil spirits be likewise employed, in conjunction with
evil angels, in tempting wicked men to sin, and in procuring occasions for
them? Yea, and in tempting good men to sin, even after they have escaped
the corruption that is in the World. Herein, doubtless, they put forth all
their strength, and greatly glory if they conquer."[27]

Although some may maintain that this passage is perhaps wanting in
theological exactness, there can be little doubt that, with much force, it
truly and eloquently embodies the belief of all Christian people, and
gives a simple and forcible explanation of Scripture statements regarding
the active and untiring energy of the legions of Hell.

Again, the Marquis de Marsay, a pious French Protestant writer of the last
century, whose collected works were issued about the year 1735, sets forth
from his own point of view a theory regarding the nature and character of
spirits, which because it bears directly on the subject of Haunted
Localities, and in some respects follows the teaching of the schoolmen, it
may be well to quote here:--

"I believe," he writes, "that there are three kind of spirits, which
return to this World, after the death of their bodies. The spirits of such
as are in a state of condemnation, and which are in a very miserable
condition, hover about, and _haunt the places where they have committed
their evil deeds and iniquities_. They remain at these places by divine
permission, and do all the evil they can; whilst, at the same time, they
suffer intolerable torments and are malignant. Some of this kind of
spirits occasionally make themselves visible.... The second kind of
spirits are those which roam about, because they seek to free themselves
from their state of purification[28] by other means than by resignation
to Divine Justice; hence they seek help from those that fear God, and in
so doing, withdraw themselves from the Divine Order.... These are not evil
spirits, but such as are still in their self-will, and therefore refuse to
yield to the Divine Order, by voluntarily submitting themselves to the
punishment imposed upon them.... _The third kind of spirits, or rather
souls that reappear, are those, whose punishment is to be at some certain
place in this world, because they have satisfied their passions in that
place, and lived according to their lusts in an idolatrous manner_; for
that which now causes a man lust and pleasure, must hereafter serve as his
pain and punishment. Of this we have several instances; amongst others,
that of a pious man, who after his death appeared to his daughter, who was
likewise a pious person, and after conversing with her some time on his
state, began to turn pale, to tremble, and be much distressed; and said to
his daughter that the time was now arrived when he must go and remain for
a time in his grave, with his putrefying and corrupting corpse; and that
this happened to him every day, because in his life-time he had had too
much affection and tenderness for his body."

The dissertations of the schoolmen, and of certain English writers of the
seventeenth century, are not unlike the above.[29] So, too, are several
of their most reasonable deductions and conclusions. In fact, Dr. Joseph
Hall, sometime Bishop of Exeter (A.D. 1627-1641, and afterwards of
Norwich, from 1641 until 1656), maintained that many souls, guilty both of
deadly sin (duly repented of during life), and of venial sin, in which not
improbably they died, might have to suffer, by lingering, unsatisfied,
because away from their Creator, and about the places where they sinned
in their lifetime, until their temporal punishment was complete; a theory
which though from the pen of one suspected of favouring Puritanism, is
very like that embodied in the faith and practice of the Universal Church.

However this may be, at all events there is scarcely a locality in which
some old tradition as regards Haunted Houses and Places does not exist;
and which is not more or less accepted and believed in even now. A general
rejection of the Supernatural may be the case with many, and a shallow
desire not to be thought superstitious or over-credulous by more, are
obvious reasons why some traditions have become weakened and others
obscure. But putting aside all such, half-lost, forgotten, or fading away,
and making every allowance for exaggeration and hyperbole, the facts which
can still be testified to by credible witnesses, the evidence which is
even now on record, coupled with that innate sentiment of awe, so common
to many, and often strengthened by a sound religious belief, which gives
point to old traditions, are sufficient to induce the calm and the
unprejudiced not too hastily to disavow the existence of a principle of
almost universal acceptance with mankind, and which neither the lame and
limping logic of the sceptic, nor the imperfectly marshalled facts and
random conclusions of the materialist can, in the long run, either weaken
or destroy.
