The following curious record, a fair example of numerous others, may now
be suitably set forth:--

"Elizabeth, the third daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke (preceptor to Edward
VI.) married Sir Thomas Hobby, of Bisham Abbey in Berkshire, and
accompanied him to France, when as ambassador to Queen Elizabeth he went
thither. On his death abroad in 1566 Lady Hobby brought his corpse home to
Bisham, where he was buried in a mortuary chapel. She afterwards married
John, Lord Russell. By her first husband she had a son, who when quite
young is said to have entertained the greatest dislike and antipathy to
every kind of learning; and such was his resolute repugnance to acquiring
the art of writing that in a fit of obstinacy he would wilfully and
deliberately blot his writing-books in the most slovenly manner. Such
conduct so vexed and angered his mother, who was eminently intellectual,
and like her three sisters, Lady Burleigh, Lady Bacon, and Lady Killigrew,
an excellent classical scholar, that she beat him again and again on the
shoulders and head, and at last so severely and unmercifully that he died.

"It is commonly reported that, as a punishment for her unnatural cruelty,
her spirit is doomed to haunt the house where this cruel act of
manslaughter was perpetrated. Several persons have seen the apparition,
the likeness of which, both as regards feature and dress, to a pale
portrait of her ladyship in antique widow's weeds still remaining at
Bisham, is said to be exact and lifelike. She is reported to glide through
a certain chamber, in the act of washing blood stains from her hands. And
on some occasions the apparition is said to have been seen in the grounds
of the old mansion.

"A very remarkable occurrence in connection with this narrative, took
place about thirty years ago. In taking down an old oak window-shutter of
the latter part of the sixteenth century, _a packet of antique copy-books
of that period were discovered pushed into the wall between the joists of
the skirting, and several of these books on which young Hobby's name was
written, were covered with blots, thus supporting the ordinary
tradition_."[30]
