This chamber, though furnished as a bedroom, is seldom used, and is said
to be never entered without trepidation and awe. Occasionally, however,
some persons have been found bold enough to dare the harmless noises of
the mysterious intruder; and many are the stories current in
Buckinghamshire respecting such adventures. The following will suffice as
a specimen, and may be depended on as authentic:--

"About the year 1850, a gentleman, not many years ago High Sheriff of the
county, who resides some few miles' distance from Creslow, rode over to a
dinner-party; and, as the night became exceedingly dark and rainy, he was
urged to stay over the night if he had no objection to sleep in the
haunted chamber. The offer of a bed in such a room, so far from deterring
him, induced him at once to accept the invitation. He was a strong-minded
man of a powerful frame and undaunted courage, and like so many others,
entertained a sovereign contempt for all haunted chambers, ghosts, and
apparitions. The room was prepared for him. He would neither have a fire
nor a night-light, but was provided with a box of lucifers that he might
light a candle if he wished. Arming himself in jest with a cutlass and a
brace of pistols, he took a serio-comic farewell of the family and entered
his formidable dormitory.

"In due course, morning dawned; the sun rose, and a most beautiful day
succeeded a very wet and dismal night. The family and their guests
assembled in the breakfast-room, and every countenance seemed cheered and
brightened by the loveliness of the morning. They drew round the table,
when the host remarked that Mr. S--, the tenant of the haunted chamber,
was absent. A servant was sent to summon him to breakfast, but he soon
returned, saying he had knocked loudly at his door, but received no
answer, and that a jug of hot water left there was still standing unused.
On hearing this, two or three gentlemen ran up to the room, and, after
knocking and receiving no answer, opened it and entered. It was empty.
Inquiry was made of the servants; they had neither seen nor heard anything
of him. As he was a county magistrate, some supposed that he had gone to
attend the Board which met that morning at an early hour. But his horse
was still in the stable; so that could not be. While they were at
breakfast, however, he came in, and gave the following account of his last
night's experiences:--'Having entered my room,' said he, 'I locked and
bolted both the doors, carefully examined the whole room, and satisfied
myself that there was no living creature in it but myself, nor any
entrance but those which I had secured. I got into bed, and, with the
conviction that I should sleep soundly as usual till six in the morning,
was soon lost in a comfortable slumber. Suddenly I was awakened, and, on
raising my head to listen, I certainly heard a sound resembling the light
soft tread of a lady's footstep, accompanied with the rustling as of a
silk gown. I sprang out of bed, and having lighted a candle, found that
there was nothing either to be seen or heard. I carefully examined the
whole room. I looked under the bed, into the fire-place, up the chimney,
and at both the doors, which were fastened just as I had left them. I then
looked at my watch, and found it was a few minutes past twelve. As all was
now perfectly quiet again, I put out the candle, got into bed, and soon
fell asleep. I was again aroused. The noise was now louder than before. It
appeared like the violent rustling of a stiff silk dress. A second time I
sprang out of bed, darted to the spot where the noise was, and tried to
grasp the intruder in my arms. My arms met together, but enclosed nothing.
The noise passed to another part of the room, and I followed it, groping
near the floor to prevent anything passing under my arms. It was in vain,
I could feel nothing. The sound died at the doorway to the crypt, and all
again was still. I now left the candle burning, though I never sleep
comfortably with a light in my room, and went to bed again, but certainly
felt not a little perplexed at being unable to detect the cause of the
noise, nor to account for its cessation when the candle was lighted.'"

So that this gentleman's experience (and as to ghosts, he was a sceptic)
only served to strengthen the old and unbroken tradition. Of its
foundation nothing very certain is known. The general facts, however, are
commonly received.
