An account of the haunting of Spedlin's Tower was furnished to me by a
Scotch friend, who asserts and vouches for the authenticity of the
tradition:--

"Spedlin's Tower, the scene of one of the best accredited and most curious
ghost stories perhaps ever printed, stands on the south-west bank of the
Annan, in Dumfriesshire. The ghost story is simply this:--Sir Alexander
Jardine, of Applegarth, in the time of Charles II., had confined in the
dungeon of his tower of Spedlin's, a miller named Porteous, suspected of
having wilfully set fire to his own premises. Sir Alexander being soon
after suddenly called away to Edinburgh, carried the key of the vault with
him, and did not recollect or consider his prisoner's case till he was
passing through the West Port, where, perhaps, the sight of the warder's
keys brought the matter to his mind. He immediately sent back a courier to
liberate the man, but Porteous had, in the meantime, died of hunger.

"No sooner was he dead, than his ghost began to torment the household, and
no rest was to be had within Spedlin's Tower by day or by night. In this
dilemma, Sir Alexander, according to old use and wont, summoned a whole
legion of ministers to his aid; and by their strenuous efforts, Porteous
was at length confined to the scene of his mortal agonies, where, however,
he continued to scream occasionally at night, 'Let me out, let me out,
for I'm deein' o' hunger!' He also used to flutter against the door of the
vault, and was always sure to remove the bark from any twig that was
sportively thrust through the key-hole. The spell which thus compelled the
spirit to remain in bondage was attached to a large black-lettered Bible,
used by the exorcists, and afterwards deposited in a stone niche, which
still remains in the wall of the staircase; and it is certain that, after
the lapse of many years, when the family repaired to a newer mansion
(Jardine Hall), built on the other side of the river, the Bible was left
behind, to keep the restless spirit in order. On one occasion, indeed, the
volume requiring to be rebound, was sent to Edinburgh; but the ghost,
getting out of the dungeon, and crossing the river, made such a
disturbance in the new house, hauling the baronet and his lady out of bed,
&c., that the Bible was recalled before it reached Edinburgh, and placed
in its former situation. The good woman who told Grose this story in 1788,
declared that should the Bible again be taken off the premises, no
consideration whatever should induce her to remain there a single night.
But the charm seems to be now broken, or the ghost must have become either
quiet or disregarded, for the Bible is at present kept at Jardine Hall."
