The next example to be recorded, the Apparition of the Rev. Mr. Naylor,
may be found in Mr. John Nichols' "Literary Illustrations,"[3] and, though
less startling than that already given, is certainly not without its own
inherent interest:--

    "Part of a Letter from Mr. Edward Walter, Fellow of S. John's College,
    Cambridge, to his friend in the country, dated 'Dec. 6, 1706.'

    "'I should scarce have mentioned anything of the matter you write
    about of my own accord; but, since you have given yourself the trouble
    of an inquiry, I am, I think, obliged in friendship to relate all that
    I know of the matter; and that I do the more willingly, because I can
    so soon produce my authority.

    "'Mr. Shaw, to whom the apparition appeared, was Rector of Soldern, or
    Souldern, in Oxfordshire, late of S. John's College aforesaid; on whom
    Mr. Grove, his old Fellow Collegiate, called July last in his journey
    to the West, where he stayed a day or two, and promised to see him
    again on his return, which he did, and stayed three days with him; in
    that time one night after supper, Mr. Shaw told him that there
    happened a passage which he could not conceal from him, as being an
    intimate friend, and one to whom this transaction might have something
    more relation than another man. He proceeded therefore, and told him
    that about a week before that time, viz. July the 28th, 1706, as he
    was smoking and reading in his study about eleven or twelve at night,
    there came to him the apparition of Mr. Naylor, formerly Fellow of the
    said College, and dead some years ago, a friend of Mr. Shaw's, in the
    same garb he used to be in, with his hands clasped before him. Mr.
    Shaw, not being much surprised, asked him how he did and desired him
    to sit down, which Mr. Naylor did. They both sat there a considerable
    time and entertained one another with various discourses. Mr. Shaw
    then asked him after what manner they lived in the separate state; he
    answered, Far different from what they do here, but that he was very
    well. He inquired further, whether there was any of their old
    acquaintance in that place where he was? he answered, 'No, not one;'
    and then proceeded and told him that one of their old friends, naming
    Mr. Orchard, should die quickly, and he himself should not be long
    after. There was mention of several people's names; but who they were,
    or upon what occasion, Mr. Grove cannot or will not tell. Mr. Shaw
    then asked him whether he would not visit him again before that time;
    he answered, No, he could not; he had but three days allowed him, and
    farther he could not go. Mr. Shaw said, "_Fiat voluntas Domini_;" and
    the apparition left him. This is word for word as Mr. Shaw told Mr.
    Grove, and Mr. Grove told me.

    "'_Note._--What surprised Mr. Grove was, that as he had in his journey
    homewards occasion to ride through Clopton, or Claxton, he called upon
    one Mr. Clark, Fellow of our College aforesaid and curate there, when
    inquiring after College news, Mr. Clark told him Arthur Orchard[4]
    died that week, Aug. 7, 1706, which very much shocked Mr. Grove, and
    brought to his mind the story of Mr. Shaw afresh. About three weeks
    ago Mr. Shaw died of apoplexy in the desk, [_i. e._ when ministering
    in church,] of the same distemper poor Arthur Orchard died of.

    "'_Note._--Since this strange completion of matters, Mr. Grove has
    told this relation, and stands to the truth of it; and that which
    confirms the narrative is, that he told the same to Dr. Baldiston, the
    present Vice-Chancellor and Master of Emanuel College, above a week
    before Mr. Shaw's death; and when he came to the College he was no way
    surprised as others were.

    "'What farthers my belief of its being a true vision and not a dream,
    is Mr. Grove's incredulity of stories of this nature. Considering them
    both as men of learning and integrity, the one would not first have
    declared, nor the other have spread the same, were not the matter
    serious and real.

        "'Edward Walter.'"
