Another example from Scotland now follows, all the more remarkable,
because it is still asserted that in a certain part of the mansion unusual
voices, and supernatural footsteps are said to be still heard, a fact to
which the late Mr. Hope Scott often testified:--Sir Walter Scott relates a
striking occurrence which happened to him at the time Abbotsford was in
the course of erection. Mr. Bullock was then employed by him to fit the
castle up with proper appurtenances, when during that person's absence in
London the following extraordinary circumstance took place:--In a letter
to Mr. Terry in the year 1818 Scott wrote:--"The night before last we were
awakened by a violent noise like drawing heavy boards along the new part
of the House. I fancied something had fallen and thought no more about it.
This was about two in the morning. Last night at the same witching hour
the same noise recurred. Mrs. S., as you know, is rather timbersome; so up
I got with Beardy's broadsword under my arm,

  'Sat bolt upright
   And ready to fight.'

But nothing was out of order; neither could I discover what occasioned the
disturbance." Now, strangely enough on the morning that Mr. Terry received
this letter he was breakfasting with Mr. Erskine (afterwards Lord
Kinneder) and the chief subject of their conversation was the sudden death
of Mr. Bullock, which on comparing dates must have happened on the same
night and as near as could possibly be ascertained at the same hour, these
disturbances occurred at Abbotsford. One might be induced to maintain that
some drunken workmen or disorderly persons were on the premises, but this
method for accounting for the coincidence will at once be exploded on
reading the following passage from Scott to the same gentleman:--"Were you
not struck with the fantastical coincidence of our nocturnal disturbance
at Abbotsford with the melancholy event that followed? I protest to you
that the noise resembled half-a-dozen men hard at work pulling up boards
and furniture, _and nothing could be more certain than that there was
nobody on the premises at the time_."
