The following account of a haunted locality is from the pen of a scholarly
and accomplished clergyman[33] in the diocese of Ripon:--"Some years ago I
was residing in a village about eleven miles from York, and one mile and a
half from another village, in which was the Post Office for the
surrounding district. Whenever I had reason to suppose a letter was lying
there for me, I used to anticipate the delivery of it on the following
morning, by calling for it myself in the evening before. One night, in the
latter end of November, I was going, for this purpose, along the path
through the fields, and when I was midway between the two villages, I
passed through a little hand-gate, and after going about twenty yards from
it, I was startled and alarmed by a succession of the most horrible
shrieks that can possibly be conceived. They seemed scarcely human, though
I felt at the time that they were certainly uttered by some man or woman,
imitating the piercing scream of a hog when the fatal knife is being
plunged into its throat. The panic that seized me vanished in a moment, as
the thought instantaneously flashed across my mind that I was being made
the victim of some ploughman's joke. Being armed, as I then invariably
was, with a particularly tough and stout cudgel, I ran back to the little
hand-gate on tip-toe, intending to take condign vengeance on some rustic,
whom I felt sure I should find crouching down behind the low hedge. Just
as I reached the hand-gate, the sounds suddenly ceased, and to my utmost
astonishment I could see no one, although it was quite impossible for any
person within the distance of two or three hundred yards to have escaped
my observation. The full moon was shining brightly, with the very thinnest
of fleecy clouds before her face, which did not obscure her light, but
only made the whole country distinctly visible in every direction, from
the absence of all strongly-defined shadow. Then, again, I must confess,
an unaccountably superstitious awe crept over me, and, instead of pursuing
my intended route, I returned to my own home.

"On the following morning, when reflecting on what had happened, I began
to take a philosophical and reasonable view of the singular occurrence.
In passing through the little gate I might, as I thought, have left it
ajar, and that soon after it lost its nice equilibrium, and swung back to
its accustomed resting-place. The hinges might have given a creaking
sound, which the lonely solitude of the night had intensely magnified in
my imagination. So much for the philosophical view. I then determined that
I would put this view to the proof, and see if I could by any means get
the gate to produce any noise similar to what I fancied I had heard. This
was the reasonable view. I took care, however, to put my determination
into practice at the earliest period of the evening, just, in fact, as the
daylight had departed. Accordingly I was at the little gate between five
and six o'clock, but in spite of all kinds of efforts it would make no
sign, but swung backwards and forwards on its hinges with noiseless
smoothness. In the midst of my experiments a very intelligent man, a
Gardener by calling, came up. He was a resident of my own village, but had
been working in the other village, and was then returning home from his
day's labour. He expressed some surprise at seeing me there at that time
of the evening, and I gave him a brief account of the reason. 'Well, sir,'
said he; 'if you will walk back with me, I will tell you something more
about that little hand-gate.' I consented immediately, and he said to me
as follows: 'Some years ago, when we were all children at home, my mother
had been to the other village, where she remained till night; on her
return homewards, just as she passed through the little gate, she saw some
kind of figure lying close by it, huddled together in a strange,
mysterious manner. She was horror-stricken, and fled from the spot as fast
as possible. On reaching her own cottage, she flung open the door, and
fell fainting on the ground before her astonished and frightened children.
When she came to herself, and was asked what had caused her evident
terror, she told what she had seen, and where she had seen it. She could,
however, give no definite description of the figure she had seen. She
could only say, "It was something hideous." But never could she be induced
to pass that place again after night-fall, as long as she lived.' 'Well,'
said I, 'this is a very remarkable coincidence.' 'Yes,' said he, 'but I
will tell you something more remarkable still. About forty years ago the
land between the two villages was unenclosed. It was nothing more than a
wild, uncultivated common. One night, about that period, as the villagers
were going to bed, loud and piercing shrieks were heard coming from the
common. Some of the men dressed themselves hastily, with the intention of
going and seeing what was taking place. Some woman, as it seemed to them,
was evidently being ill-treated. They set off on their kindly-intentioned
errand, but as the sounds completely ceased, and the night was very dark,
they thought it impossible to reach the exact spot where their services
might be required. They went to bed, and slept soundly. On the following
morning one of them was going to work at the other village, and as he
passed over the common he was almost distilled to a jelly with the effect
of fright at the appalling sight that suddenly met his gaze. A woman was
lying before him, huddled up on the ground, quite dead, with her throat
cut from ear to ear. She had evidently been murdered, on the preceding
night. Who she was, whence she came, why or by whom she had been murdered,
was never known, and probably never will be in this world. When, a short
time after this dreadful event, the common was enclosed, it so happened
that the little hand-gate was put up close to the spot where the woman's
lifeless body was found.'

"He finished his narrative. I thanked him for it, and internally resolved
never, if I could help it, to pass through those fields alone in the gloom
of night, on any account whatever. I scrupulously kept my resolve."
