The celebrated case of the Haunted Room in the Jewel House of the Tower of
London created great interest, about fifty-five years ago. Additional
interest and importance have been given to it by the publication of the
following authentic account of Mr. E. Lenthal Swifte,[34] which in simple
but forcible language tells its own story:--

"I have often purposed to leave behind me a faithful record of all that I
know personally of this strange story.... Forty-three years have passed,
and its impression is as vividly before me as on the moment of its
occurrence.... In 1814 I was appointed keeper of the Crown Jewels in the
Tower, where I resided with my family until my retirement in 1852. One
Saturday night in October, 1817, about 'the witching hour,' I was at
supper with my then wife, our little boy, and her sister, in the sitting
room of the Jewel House, which--then comparatively modernized--is said to
have been 'the doleful prison' of Anne Boleyn, and of the ten bishops whom
Oliver Cromwell piously accommodated therein.... The room was, as it still
is, irregularly shaped, having three doors and two windows, which last are
cut nearly nine feet deep into the outer wall; between these is a
chimney-piece projecting far into the room, and (then) surmounted with a
large oil picture. On the night in question the doors were all closed;
heavy and dark cloth curtains were let down over the windows, and the only
light in the room was that of two candles on the table.... I sate at the
foot of the table, my son on my right hand, his mother fronting the
chimney-piece, and her sister on the opposite side. I had offered a glass
of wine and water to my wife, when, on putting it to her lips, she paused
and exclaimed, 'Good God, what is that?' I looked up, and saw a
cylindrical figure like a glass tube, seemingly about the thickness of my
arm, and hovering between the ceiling and the table. Its contents appeared
to be a dense fluid, white and pale azure, like to the gathering of a
summer cloud, and incessantly rolling and mingling within the cylinder.
This lasted about two minutes, when it began slowly to move _before_ my
sister-in-law, then following the oblong shape of the table, before my son
and myself; passing _behind_ my wife it paused for a moment over her right
shoulder (observe, there was no mirror opposite to her in which she could
then behold it). Instantly she crouched down, and, with both hands
covering her shoulder, she shrieked out, 'Oh, Christ! it has seized me.'
Even now, while writing, I feel the fresh horror of that moment. I caught
up my chair, struck at the wainscot behind her, rushed upstairs to the
other children's room, and told the terrified nurse what I had seen....
Neither my sister-in-law nor my son beheld this 'appearance.'... I am
bound to add that shortly before this strange event some young lady
residents in the Tower had been, I know not wherefore, suspected of making
phantasmagorical experiments at their windows, which, be it observed, had
no command whatever on any windows in my dwelling. An additional sentry
was accordingly posted so as to overlook any such attempt. Happening,
however, as it might, following hard at heel the visitation of my
household, one of the night sentries at the Jewel Office was, as he said,
alarmed by a figure like a huge bear issuing from underneath the door. He
thrust at it with his bayonet, which stuck in the door, even as my chair
dinted the wainscot. He dropped in a fit, and was carried senseless to the
guard-room. His fellow-sentry declared that the man was neither asleep nor
drunk, he himself having seen him the moment before awake and sober. Of
all this I avouch nothing more than that I saw the poor man in the
guard-house prostrated with terror, and that in two or three days the
fatal result, be it of fact or fancy, was that he died. Let it be
understood that to _all_ which I have herein set forth _as seen by
myself_, I absolutely pledge my faith and my honour.--Edmund Lenthal
Swifte."
