Another statement, regarding another apparition in the same part of the
Tower, stated by Mr. Offor to have been produced by some instrument, but
which latter assertion is pronounced impossible by Mr. Lenthal Swifte,
also sufficiently illustrates the facts embodied in it:--

    "Before the burning of the armouries there was a paved yard in front
    of the Jewel House, from which a gloomy and ghost-like doorway led
    down a flight of steps to the Mint. Some strange noises were heard in
    this gloomy corner; and on a dark night at twelve the sentry saw a
    figure like a bear cross the pavement and disappear down the steps.
    This so terrified him that he fell, and in a few hours after, having
    recovered sufficiently to tell the tale, he died. It was fully
    believed to have arisen from phantasmagoria.... The soldier bore a
    high character for bravery and good conduct. I was then in my
    thirtieth year, and was present when his body was buried with military
    honours in the Flemish burial ground, St. Catherine's.

        "George Offor."

On this, however, Mr. Swifte thus writes:--

    "When on the morrow I saw the unfortunate soldier in the main
    guard-room, his fellow sentinel was also there, and testified to
    having seen him on his post just before the alarm, awake and alert,
    and even spoken to him. Moreover, as I then heard the poor man tell
    his own story, the figure did not cross the pavement and disappear
    down the steps of the sally-port; but issued from underneath the Jewel
    Room door--as ghostly a door, indeed, as ever was opened to or closed
    on a doomed man; placed, too, beneath a stone archway as utterly out
    of the reach of my young friends' apparatus (if any such they had) as
    were my windows. I saw him once again on the following day, but
    changed beyond my recognition; in another day or two--_not_ 'in a few
    hours'--the brave and steady soldier, who would have mounted a breach
    or led a forlorn hope with unshaken nerves, died at the presence of a
    shadow, as the weakest woman might have died.

        "Edmund Lenthal Swifte."
