The case of a Haunted House in Northamptonshire may now follow:--

"A house at Barby,[35] a small village about eight miles from Rugby, was
reputed to be haunted, and this under the following circumstances:--An old
woman of the name of Webb, a native of the place, and above the usual
height, died on March 3, 1851, at two A.M. aged sixty-seven. Late in life
she had married a man of some means, who having predeceased her, left her
his property, so that she was in good circumstances. Her chief and
notorious characteristic, however, was excessive penuriousness, being
remarkably miserly in her habits; and it is believed by many in the
village that she thus shortened her days. Two of her neighbours, women of
the names of Griffin and Holding, nursed her during her last illness, and
her nephew, Mr. Hart, a farmer in the village, supplied her temporal
needs; in whose favour she had made a will, by which she bequeathed to him
all her possessions.

"About a month after the funeral Mrs. Holding, who, with her uncle, lived
next door to the house of the deceased (which had been entirely shut up
since the funeral), was alarmed and astonished at hearing loud and heavy
thumps against the partition wall, and especially against the door of a
cupboard in the room wall, while other strange noises, like the dragging
of furniture about the rooms (though all the furniture had been removed),
and the house was empty. These were chiefly heard about two o'clock in the
morning.

"Early in the month of April a family of the name of Accleton, much
needing a residence, took the deceased woman's house, the only one in the
village vacant, and bringing their goods and chattels, proceeded to
inhabit it. The husband was often absent, but he and his wife occupied the
room in which Mrs. Webb had died, while their daughter, a girl about ten
years of age, slept in a small bed in the corner. Violent noises in the
night were heard about two o'clock, thumps, tramps, and tremendous
crashes, as if all the furniture had been collected together, and then
violently banged on to the floor. One night at two A.M. the parents were
suddenly awakened by the violent screams of the child, 'Mother, mother,
there's a tall woman standing by my bed, a-shaking her head at me!' The
parents could see nothing, so did their best to quiet and compose the
child. At four o'clock they were again awakened by the child's screams,
for she had seen the woman again; in fact she appeared to her no less than
seven times, on seven subsequent nights.

"Mrs. Accleton, during her husband's absence, having engaged her mother to
sleep with her one night, was suddenly aroused at the same hour of two by
a strange and unusual light in her room. Looking up she saw quite plainly
the spirit of Mrs. Webb, which moved towards her with a gentle appealing
manner, as though it would have said, 'Speak, speak!'

"This spectre appeared likewise to a Mrs. Radbourne, a Mrs. Griffiths, and
a Mrs. Holding. They assert that luminous balls of light hovered about the
room during the presence of the spirit, and that streams of light seemed
to go up towards a trap-door in the ceiling, which led to the roof of the
cottage. Each person who saw it testified likewise to hearing a low,
unearthly, moaning noise,--'strange and unnatural-like,' but somewhat
similar in character to the moans of the woman in her death-agony.

"The subject was, of course, discussed; and Mrs. Accleton suggested that
its appearance might not impossibly be connected with the existence of
money hoarded up in the roof, an idea which may have arisen from the
miserly habits of the dead woman. This hint having been given to and taken
by her nephew, Mr. Hart, the farmer, he proceeded to the house, and with
Mrs. Accleton's personal help made a search. The loft above was totally
dark, but by the aid of a candle there was discovered, firstly, a bundle
of writings, old deeds, as they turned out to be, and afterwards a large
bag of gold and bank-notes, out of which the nephew took a handful of
sovereigns, and exhibited them to Mrs. Accleton. But the knockings,
moanings, strange noises, and other disturbances did not cease upon this
discovery. They did cease, however, when Mr. Hart, having found that
certain debts were owing by her, carefully and scrupulously paid them. So
much for the account of the Haunted House at Barby. The circumstances were
most carefully investigated by Sir Charles Isham, Bart., and others, the
upshot of which was that the above facts were, to the complete
satisfaction of numerous enquirers, completely verified."
