"The account here set forth was recently told to me by a Captain
S----living near Cardiff, South Wales.

"A few miles from Cardiff, on the Monmouth road, there is a narrow spot
held in awe by the peasantry; for a murder was committed there years ago,
and it is said to be haunted by unquiet spirits.

"The brother of my friend, an officer in the army, who has seen active
service in India, was returning with his wife in a dog-cart, some few
months ago, from a dinner with some friends in the country a few miles
from Cardiff. It was late in the night; and as they entered the narrow
part of the road just mentioned, they heard the sound of wheels behind
them. They looked back, and saw the lights of a carriage, and to avoid
being overtaken and passed in such a narrow road, Captain S---- whipped
his horse, and tried to keep well in front. Presently the sounds of wheels
ceased; and to their great surprise, indeed consternation, they all of a
sudden saw the lights and heard the wheels of a carriage some distance on
in front of them. It was evidently the same; and yet it had never passed
them! It seemed to stop at the side of the road, and Captain S---- drove
his dog-cart past the strange carriage. He and his wife saw in it a dim
light; there were people in it, and they seemed to be without heads! Mrs.
S---- was paralysed with terror; her husband told his brother that he
would rather face a battery of artillery than go through the horror of
that moment; and the horse evidently was in sympathy with them, for he
went like one mad.

"It appears that the very same spectral figures had been seen by a
country surgeon when passing the same place; and that the land-owners in
those parts had cut down trees, and clipped and altered the appearance of
the hedges on each side of the road, in order to get rid, if possible, of
the ghastly horror, and of the hold which it has upon the popular mind.
The _appearance_ of the carriage and its occupants, in a dim, hazy light,
was to the last degree unearthly and spectral."
