A correspondent of the Editor furnishes him with the following:--

"A brother of mine, a man who is the last person in the world to believe
over much, or to be in the least degree superstitious, wishing to be near
a particular town, and yet within easy reach of the permanent country
residence of his greatest friend, was induced (A.D. 1862) to take over the
remainder of the lease of an old-fashioned furnished mansion in Cheshire,
where he, with his wife, children, and servants, in due course, went to
reside. He was advised to take the place as well because of the
reasonableness of the rent--for it was spacious and comfortably
furnished--as by the recommendation of the London house-agents, a
well-known firm in the West End, with whom the letting of it rested.

"Soon after the arrival of the family and servants, the latter protested
again and again that they were disturbed almost every night by a continual
'tramp, tramp, tramp' of heavy footsteps up the stairs, and along the
narrow passage, out of which were the doors which led to their bedrooms.
They would have it that the house was haunted. The sounds were sometimes
so loud and alarming that, as one of the servants remarked, 'It seemed
like a regiment of foot soldiers marching over creaking boards.'
Complaints were made to my brother, who merely said that the noises must
be the result of wind under the joists, or of rats, and he laughed at the
whole affair. Some of the servants gave warning, and left. Still the
sounds went on: not always, and every night, but, with certain cessations,
from time to time.

"In the autumn of the year 1863, a lady, her daughter of fourteen, and a
maid, came to stay in the House; and as the former was somewhat of an
invalid, a suite of rooms in the west wing, each communicating with the
other, was apportioned to them. The second night after their arrival, the
lady in question, suddenly awaking, saw in her bedroom a luminous cloud,
which gradually appeared to be formed into the shape of an old man, with a
most painfully depressing countenance, full of the deepest sorrow, and
wearing a large full-bottomed wig. She tried to raise herself in bed, to
see if it were not the effect of her half-waking fancy, or the result of a
disturbed dream, but could not. The room, in which there was no natural
light, seemed to be partially but quite sufficiently illuminated; and she
felt confident that a spectre was before her. She gazed at it for some
minutes, three at least, hearing the ticking of her watch, and counting
the seconds. There the apparition stood, and seemed to be making an effort
to speak, while a strange, dull, inarticulate groan seemed to come up as
from the floor. Upon this, seeing the bell-rope hanging within the folds
of the curtains at her right hand, she braced herself up to seize it and
give it a most violent pull. Immediately she did this, the face of the
figure bore an expression of anger, and by degrees it faded away. The
bell, which hung some distance away, was heard by no one, and she was
compelled to lie alone, for she feared to rise (though the apparition did
not reappear) until the church clock near struck four, when, the morning
having broken, she rose, and dressed herself.

"In the morning, before she had said a word, her daughter, on meeting her,
said, 'Oh, mamma, an old man in a great wig tramped through my room twice
in the night. Who could it have been?'

"The lady being so impressed by these occurrences, which her host and
hostess would persist in saying were only the result of her own fancy,
determined on leaving in the course of a few days (as she afterwards
stated). On the following night, she slept with a night-light, and the
door into her maid's room open. But the noise of tramping, which had been
hitherto heard only in the servants' wing of the house, which was
opposite, was now heard in the east side of it. 'Tramp, tramp, tramp!' the
sounds were heard constantly, without cessation; so much so that the
master of the house, my brother, rose suddenly that very night, thinking
that thieves had broken in, and rushed out to the east passage. But all in
a moment, they stopped; nothing was to be heard, nothing seen; all was
still. This occurred again and again.

"The lady left as arranged. The noises ceased for a while, and then began
once more. It was with difficulty that any of the servants could be
induced to remain, believing that the house was haunted.

"About ten months afterwards, my brother having forgotten all about the
supposed spectre and the noises, had been out for the day, and returned
home in a dog-cart, some time after midnight, in company with his groom.
Only the housekeeper had remained out of bed, as his return was quite
uncertain. The horse and trap were put up, both the servants had gone to
their rooms, and my brother was taking some refreshment in the
housekeeper's apartment, by the light of the fire, when all of a sudden, a
loud and decisive rap was heard at the door. Thinking, of course, that it
was one of the servants, he replied, 'Come in.' Before the words were out
of his mouth, the door opened, and the apparition of the old man in a
large wig stood before him. My brother was paralysed with terror for a
while. He could not speak; he tried hard, as he says, but his mouth was
dry and his tongue motionless. 'Good God!' he exclaimed at length, 'am I
awake or asleep, in my senses or gone mad?' The motionless figure, whose
face was intensely sad, looked at him beseechingly. 'In God's Name, what
do you want, or what can I do for you?' 'Too late! nothing,' was the
mournful, but somewhat inarticulate response. And with that the spectre
suddenly vanished away. At this moment a strong, loud, piercing, bitter
wail, as of the voice of a woman, broke the awful silence. It seemed to
come from the courtyard outside, and was repeated again and again round
the upper part of the house. The scream was said to be like nothing human.
The servants heard it, my sister-in-law was awoke by it, and the groom and
housekeeper, with the others, as a consequence, came rushing downstairs.
My brother, who is as brave and bold as he is remarkable for common sense,
does not now dispute the reality of haunted houses.

"A few months afterwards, he and his left. And after he had given up
possession, he was informed, on good and credible authority, that
tradition confidently asserted the mansion to have been the residence of a
disreputable Dutch hanger-on of William of Orange, who is represented to
have violently made away with one of his mistresses in that very house, in
a room which overlooked the park, now a disused lumber-room, at the east
end of the old mansion."[36]
