An American clergyman, of what is commonly termed "the Protestant
Episcopal Church," sent the following, which, as he writes, "went the
round of the newspapers," and for the truth of which he himself vouches:--

"Few positions in life can be imagined more disagreeable than that of
being imprisoned in a haunted cell in a police station. 'The New Orleans
Times' tells a most unpleasant story of a ghost-infested cell in the
Fourth Precinct police station in that city. It appears that several years
ago 'a little old woman,' named Ann Murphy, committed suicide by hanging
herself in this cell; and since that event no fewer than thirteen persons
have attempted to destroy themselves in a similar manner; four of these
attempts being attended with fatal results. One of those lately cut down
before life was extinct was a girl named Mary Taylor, who, on recovering
consciousness, declared that while lying on the floor of the cell she was
aroused by a little old white woman in a faded calico dress, with no
stockings and down-trodden slippers, with a faded handkerchief tied round
her head. Her faded dress was bound with a sort of reddish-brown tape, and
her hand was long, faded, and wrinkled, while on the fourth finger of her
left hand was a plain, thin gold ring. 'This little woman,' said the girl,
'beckoned me to get up, and impelled me by some mysterious power to tear
my dress in strips, place one of the strips round my neck, and tie the
other to the bars. I lifted my feet from the floor, and fell. I thought I
was choking, a thousand lights seemed to flash before my eyes, and I
forgot all until I found myself in the room with the doctors and police
bending over me. It was not until then that I really comprehended what I
had done, and was, I believe, under a kind of trance or influence at the
time, over which I had no control.' Mary Taylor had never heard of the
suicide of Ann Murphy, whose appearance, according to the police, tallied
exactly with the description given by the girl. Others having complained
in a like manner of the ghostly occupant of the cell, the police, to test
the real facts of the case, placed a night lodger who had just arrived in
the city in this cheerful apartment. Being thoroughly tired and worn out,
he fell asleep immediately, but shortly afterwards rushed into the office
in a state of terrible alarm. He, too, had been visited by the little old
woman, and wisely declined to sleep another hour in the station."
