The following case, as may be seen from an attestation at its conclusion,
is likewise well authenticated:--

"An English clergyman, who was seeking a residence in a northern Scottish
city about ten years ago, had his attention accidentally called to an
old-fashioned, pleasant-looking detached house, of some size and
convenience, which had been for some time vacant, about a mile and a-half
from the city. It had considerable grounds round it well timbered, a
high-walled garden, and was in many respects both commodious and
comfortable. One attraction, likewise, was the extremely moderate rent
which was asked for it. So he secured a lease of it for a short term of
years. He and his family and servants came up from England in due course,
and took up their abode in it. They were not there long before it soon
became evident, to some of them at least, that the house was haunted.
Noises of the most extraordinary character were heard in various parts.
Sometimes there came the sound of heavy footsteps on the stairs. At others
there were knocks, both violent and gentle, at the doors, none of which
could be accounted for. At midnight, on several occasions, there was a
constant, uninterrupted sound in one room, as if a large sledgehammer
(having been wrapped in a blanket folded several times), was steadily and
regularly struck against the wall, at the head of the bed in the room, by
some particularly powerful arms. 'Thump, thump, thump,' it sounded, as
though lifted and directed with tremendous force; and this noise often
lasted, with only slight intermission, for two or three hours. On other
occasions persons on the stairs or in the passages felt the air move, and
heard the creaking of the floor close to them, as if someone invisible
were passing quickly by. One night, between twelve and two, the master and
mistress of the family were awakened by a loud and startling noise, as if
all the shutters of the windows of the house had been suddenly and
simultaneously burst open with the greatest violence. The crash was
literally tremendous; and each believed that thieves were breaking in. So
the clergyman, seizing a large presentation sword which hung on the wall
of the landing, unsheathed it, and went downstairs with a light, expecting
to face the intruders. He first examined the dining-room (from whence the
noise seemed chiefly to come), but everything was just as usual. No
shutter was open; no cupboards forced. So, too, in hall and library.
Nothing was moved. Then he descended into the large cellars; but there,
likewise, everything was untouched, and nothing unusual was seen. A large
retriever dog, which lay at the foot of the front stairs, however, was
greatly agitated, trembled and howled. But still nothing was to be seen.
Perfect silence reigned. So the clergyman and his wife returned to their
sleeping-room, only to hear, all of a sudden, precisely the same strange
noise repeated about ten minutes after their return, with, if anything,
even greater violence.

It was currently reported, and commonly believed by several residents
thereabouts, that many years previously, the cast-off mistress of a Scotch
nobleman, having been handed over to a physician and university professor
for marriage, and the latter having received from the nobleman in
consideration of the marriage the gift of the house and lands in question,
subsequently murdered the woman, for whom he had conceived a special
dislike, and buried her body on the premises. This story, with slight but
unimportant variations, was told by several; and it is quite certain that
a young female Scotch servant, who once lived in the house, following the
sound of heavy footsteps up to an attic in the front portion of the house,
which she had pledged herself to do when next she heard them, fell down in
a swoon or fit at the top of the stairs; from that moment lost her reason,
and is now in a lunatic asylum, near the City in question. These are facts
testified to by those who know the circumstances.[37] As to the general
accuracy of the foregoing, the Editor is enabled, on the testimony of
several, to pledge his word thereto.
