I am indebted for the following narrative to a friend,[38] who in her own
words has given all the details of another remarkable example of a Haunted
House:--

"Monsieur de Goumoëns, a magistrate, or a gentleman holding a high
judicial position at Berne in Switzerland, a man of undoubted and
well-established character for personal courage, as well as for moral
rectitude, related to my father, Mr. Caulfeild of Bath, with whom he was
on the most intimate terms of personal friendship, the following
circumstance, at once so extraordinary and so painful, which had come
within the precincts of his own house, as to drive him from his place of
residence. The account was given to my father in the year 1829, when he
was residing with his family at Berne. Noises and disturbances had been
frequently heard in M. de Goumoëns' bedroom, as of footsteps, the opening
and shutting of drawers, and of an escritoire when papers were shuffled
about. The heavy curtains of the large old four-posted bed were drawn and
undrawn by no human hand, and were sometimes suddenly flung up on to the
top of the bed; while the sound of the flapping of the wings of some very
large bird was often heard. All these and other sounds so disturbed M. de
Goumoëns and his wife, that the health of the latter began perceptibly and
seriously to fail. Examinations of the house made by himself, in
conjunction with the police, and special investigations of the bedroom and
other adjoining apartments, afforded no solution whatsoever of the
mystery. At length Madame de Goumoëns' maid gave warning to leave her
service, complaining that her sleep and peace were completely broken by
these supernatural occurrences. While consulting together as to what could
be done, and hesitating as to whether they might not be compelled to leave
the place, the strange sounds became louder than ever. One night they were
suddenly aroused by hearing sharp cries of distress from one of their
children, a little boy, who slept in their room, and who in great terror
called out fretfully again and again, 'Let me alone; let me alone; don't
you hurt me!' as he pointed into vacancy. This particular event was the
last straw which broke the camel's back, and led the child's parents to
determine on leaving the house immediately.

"I may add that on a subsequent and more searching examination of the
house, one room was found to be both locked and fastened up; regarding the
character of which the owner was somewhat reticent. However, the boarding
before the door, which had been papered over, was removed, the keys were
forthcoming, and the room was carefully examined. On the shutters being
opened, it was found just as it had been left since its occupation by a
previous tenant, who had gone by the sobriquet of 'the Black Styger.' He
was a nobleman of bad reputation, and had committed suicide in that very
apartment by blowing out his brains; the traces of which with blood were
found scattered both on wall and floor. It was generally believed that his
disturbed spirit haunted the place."
