One of the most singular recent examples, testified to by two independent
eye-witnesses, now deserves to be reproduced. The appearance of a large
spectral bird is thus recorded by Mr. Henry Spicer in one of his curious
and thoughtfully written volumes entitled "Strange Things amongst Us:"--

"Captain Morgan, a gentleman of the highest honour and veracity, and who
certainly was not over-gifted with ideality, arrived in London one evening
in 18--, in company with a friend, and took up his lodgings in a large
old-fashioned house of the last century, to which chance had directed
them. Captain Morgan was shown into a large bed-chamber, with a huge
four-posted bed, heavy hangings, and altogether that substantial
appearance of good, solid respectability and comfort which associated
itself with our ideas of the wealthy burghers and merchants of the time of
Queen Anne and the first George, when so many strange crimes of romantic
daring or of deep treachery stained the annals of the day, and the
accursed thirst for gold, the bane of every age, appeared to exercise its
most terrific influence.

"Captain Morgan retired to bed, and slept, but was very soon awaked by a
great flapping of wings close beside him, and a cold, weird-like sensation
such as he had never before experienced spread through his frame. He
started, and sat upright in bed; when an extraordinary appearance declared
itself in the shape of an immense black bird, with outstretched wings, and
red eyes flashing as it were with fire.

"It was right before him and pecked furiously at his face and eyes so
incessantly, that it seemed to him a wonder that he was enabled, with his
arms and the pillow, to ward off the creature's determined assaults.
During the battle it occurred to him that some large pet bird belonging to
the family had effected its escape, and been accidentally shut up in the
apartment.

"Again and again the creature made at him with a malignant ferocity
perfectly indescribable; but though he invariably managed to baffle the
attack, he noticed that he never once succeeded in _touching_ his
assailant. This strange combat having lasted several minutes, the gallant
officer, little accustomed to stand so long simply on the defensive, grew
irritated, and leaping out of bed, dashed at his enemy. The bird
retreated before him. The captain followed in close pursuit, driving his
sable foe, fluttering and fighting, towards a sofa which stood in the
corner of the room. The moonlight shone full into the chamber, and Morgan
distinctly saw the creature settle down, as if in terror, upon the
embroidered seat of the sofa.

"Feeling now certain of his prey he paused for a second or two, then flung
himself suddenly upon the black object, from which he had never removed
his gaze. To his utter amazement it seemed to fade and dissolve under his
very fingers. He was clutching the air; and in vain he searched, with
lighted lamp, every nook and corner of the apartment, unwilling to believe
that his senses could be the victims of so gross a delusion--no bird was
to be found. After a long scrutiny the baffled officer once more retired
to rest, and met with no further disturbance.

"While dressing in the morning, he resolved to make no allusion to what he
had seen, but to induce his friend, on some pretext, to change rooms with
him. That unsuspecting individual readily complied, and the next day
reported, with much disgust, that he had had to contend for possession of
the chamber with the most extraordinary and perplexing object[39] he had
ever encountered, to all appearance a huge black bird, which constantly
eluded his grasp, and ultimately disappeared, leaving no clue to its mode
of exit."[40]

And with this, the present chapter is closed. Numerous other cases of
Haunted Localities might have been provided; some which have long been in
print, others which have been heard from the lips of those whose
experience and good faith testify to the truth of their narratives. In so
many examples collected, almost every one owns certain features in common:
and all in some measure are alike. Repetition, by consequence, becomes
wearisome. The cases here put on record, therefore, while sufficiently
diversified, serve abundantly to set forth the reality of those facts, to
a brief record of which this chapter has been devoted.



