The following faithful account of the rise of the modern system of
Spiritualism is borrowed from a contemporary record:--

"In December, 1847, a respectable farmer and his family, named Fox,
settled in a house at Hydesville, a hamlet near Newark, in the State of
New York. They were troubled from the first with noises, which in January,
1848, assumed the definite character of knockings, like that of a hammer.
Two children, since so famous as the Misses Fox, felt something heavy,
like a dog, lie on their feet when in bed, and one of them felt as if a
cold hand were passed over her face. The knockings went on increasing in
violence, and at length it was observed, on some occasion when Farmer Fox
tried the windows to see if they could be caused by the wind, that the
knockings exactly answered the rattle accidentally made by the moving
sash. This suggested the idea of inviting the noises, or rather the beings
who caused them, to reply by rapping, on repetition of the letters of the
alphabet, to questions put to them. This was first tried at a place called
Rochester, with which the family were connected, whence the term
'Rochester knockings' came into use. The experiment succeeded perfectly,
and this was the origin of 'spirit-rapping,' which has since grown into a
regular system. The neighbours being called in, the affair soon thickened
and developed into a 'movement.' The rappings revealed a murder which had
taken place in the house when in other hands. Public meetings were called,
committees of ladies formed to examine the children, and prevent the
possibility of deception. Similar phenomena began to show themselves in
various parts of the country, and under yet more extraordinary conditions.
Raps were heard on all sorts of objects--ceilings, tables, chairs, &c.,
and it was discovered that certain persons were better fitted than others
to communicate with the spirits, to whom these noises were now attributed.
Such persons were called _mediums_, a name with which the World is now
sufficiently familiar, and when they were present, tables and chairs would
move about and rise from the ground. Many other astonishing things became
common, as drawing and music, executed under this strange influence, by
persons who knew nothing of these arts."
