  _Outward._

  1. Vibratory Medium.
  2. Motive Medium.
  3. Gesticulating Medium.
  4. Tipping Medium.
  5. Pantomimic Medium.
  6. Impersonating Medium.

  _Inward._

  7. Pulsatory Medium.
  8. Manipulating Medium.
  9. Neurological Medium.
  10. Sympathetic Medium.
  11. Clairlative Medium.
  12. Homo-motor Medium.

  _Onward._

  13. Symbolic Medium.
  14. Psychologic Medium.
  15. Psychometric Medium.
  16. Pictorial Medium.
  17. Duodynamic Medium.
  18. Developing Medium.

  _Upward._

  19. Therapeutic Medium.
  20. Missionary Medium.
  21. Telegraphic Medium.
  22. Speaking Medium.
  23. Clairvoyant Medium.
  24. Impressional Medium.

"The _Outward_ stratum includes all kinds of mediumship in which spirits
act only on the physical organism, first using simply the electrical or
magnetic emanations from the medium and others in the room to produce
movements of objects, or concussions called rappings, and to control
matter in various ways; and secondly, using portions or the whole of the
medium's body by direct action of spirits upon the bodily organs, the
medium's spirit being more or less passive, and not taking part in the
performance....

"_Vibratory Mediumship._ I have often met with instances in my experience,
and multitudes of persons are sometimes attacked together, with variations
in accordance with individual character. The physical excitement and
convulsive phenomena often witnessed at revival meetings are chiefly of
this kind....

"The _Motive Medium_ comes next in order; he furnishes the magnetic power
by which spirits are enabled to move tables and other material objects....

"The third class is _Gesticulating Mediumship_, which appears to be a
development of the vibratory. It is exhibited by the sect of 'Shakers' of
the present day in the initiatory stage of their development, and was a
form of mediumship common amongst the prophets of the Cevennes, the
votaries of S. Vitus, and in most religious excitements.

"_Tipping Mediumship_ follows next, and this again is a step in advance
from the _Motive_ mediumship, the movements of tables and other objects
being so regulated by the intelligence of spirits as to produce
telegraphic communications....

"_Pantomimic media_ belong to the fifth class; they are made, by the
controlling or guardian spirit, to put themselves in various postures, so
as to represent any peculiarity belonging to spirit-friends who are
standing by, wishing to make their presence known and to communicate.
Lecturers on electro-biology produce, to some extent, the same effects.

"The last in this stratum is the _Impersonating Mediumship_, which is a
development from the Pantomimic. In this case the communicating spirit
enters and takes full possession of the medium's body, whilst his own
spirit stands aside."

The writer then passes on to consider what he terms the "Inward stratum,"
thus:--

"First we have _Pulsatory Mediumship_, in which the medium receives
communications from spirits and answers to mental questions by means of
pulsations, like tiny raps, on different parts of the body, or by sounds
heard only by himself. These manifestations, although very convincing to
the medium himself, afford but little satisfaction to anybody else.

"_Manipulating Mediumship_, which follows, is in fact Curative Mesmerism,
in which, however, the will of the mesmeriser is strengthened and guided
by spirits. Dr. Newton, of America, who visited Maidstone in 1870 and made
several interesting and permanent cures, is a most remarkable and
successful medium of this class, many of his cures having, indeed, all the
appearance of miracles.

"In the next form of mediumship, the _Neurological_, the spirit impresses
thoughts upon the brain, and the medium puts them into words; thus the
communications partake of the peculiarities of the medium, and if the
medium is impressed to write, he does so in his own handwriting and mode
of diction and spelling.

"Next comes _Sympathetic Mediumship_, which is an extension of the
Neurologic, but in which the spirits enter more intimately into sympathy
with the medium. Both of these last are transitional forms of mediumship,
and not very reliable until carefully developed.

"In _Clairlative Mediumship_, which succeeds in order, scenes of the past
are clearly reproduced, or original scenes pictured to the mind, as in
dreams and visions.[44]

"The last of this Inward group is called the _Homo-motor_ medium, one who
is in perfect sympathy and under the complete control of one individual
spirit only, who, in fact, appears to live a second life on earth in union
with him."

And then he defines and discusses the "Onward stratum":--

"We begin with _Symbolic Mediumship_, in which the interior vision is
opened by spiritual aid, and the medium sees in a vision the almost exact
pre-figurations of things which will occur at some future time, or which
do in reality now exist, either in germ or in full or partial development.

"The second in this group, _Psychologic Mediumship_, is a very important
form. A medium of this class is one who is in a condition to be impressed
by a sympathetic spirit with any set of ideas which he desires to
represent. It is sometimes done in a pictorial form, when the medium
clearly sees and describes scenes which appear to the vision, such as the
appearance and movements of an army, a landscape, a congregation in a
cathedral, and so forth....

"The _Psychometric Medium_ has the power of feeling and correctly
describing the characteristics of persons with whose spheres he or she is
brought into sympathy or contact. The power is generally exercised by
placing to the forehead, the perceptive region of the brain, anything
which has been intimately connected with the person, as a piece of his
hair, his handwriting, or a well-worn article of dress. Some will thus
read a sealed letter or the mottoes enclosed in nuts....

"_Pictorial Mediumship_ differs from the Symbolic chiefly in the
circumstance that the things seen and described by the medium do not in
reality exist as material facts, but are only representations, prefiguring
or bodying-forth a spiritual or psychical truth....

"The next is the _Duodynamic Medium_, a word signifying two powers, he
being capable of exhibiting two or more forms of mediumship at the same
time. These compound media, maturely developed, are said to be
comparatively rare.

"The last in this Onward stratum is the _Developing Medium_, through whom
spirits can very usefully assist in developing the mediumistic faculty in
others. They have the power of harmonising the influences which affect
them, and of rendering media passive to the action of the spirits who are
seeking the control of their organisms."

As regards the "Upward stratum," the following definitions are given:--

"The _Therapeutic Medium_ is one who effects the cure of many diseases
through the sympathetic power of seeing and describing minutely the
disorganized parts of the body, and directing the necessary treatment;
sometimes the manipulating mediumship is added, when the medium not only
sees the source of mischief, but also makes curative mesmeric passes at
the same time.

"Next, we have the _Missionary Medium_, who is irresistibly compelled to
go, without knowing why or whither, wherever the spirit guides him. Under
this controlling influence, media have been made to travel nearly all over
the civilized world, generally without purse or scrip, or any personal
knowledge of the places; the spirits raising up friends and helpers at
every step as they are required." Writing of a Missionary Medium known to
himself, Mr. Grant adds the following:--"I am acquainted with a medium of
this class in Maidstone, who is too weak in body to walk far in his
ordinary state, yet, under this influence, he is often made to walk long
distances without feeling fatigue, at the most unreasonable hours of day
or night, and he has several times been instantaneously transported from
one place to another, miles apart."

"Speaking mediumship," writes the author quoted, "is a most useful and
instructive faculty.... In most cases speakers have to be entranced, that
is, their spirits have to be removed from the body for a time, in order to
give the acting spirit full control; but when this has to be done the
medium is but little advanced from the personating mediumship, which is
one of the successive stages which a fully-developed speaking medium
generally passes through. Many of our most celebrated and effective
preachers and speakers have been, or are, really speaking media, under the
guidance of spirits, without its being suspected or understood even by
themselves. This is, indeed, 'inspiration.'

"The _Clairvoyant Medium_ follows next in order, and is in advance of the
telegraphic, because he is able to see the scenes that are actually
transpiring at the time in another place, no matter how far distant.

"The _Impressional Medium_ is generally one who has advanced through the
neurologic, sympathetic, clairlative, and psychologic phases, and thus
become so easily and thoroughly impressible by his guardian spirit that
the medium appears to live a double life, the conditions and circumstances
of both states of existence finding a ready expression through his
organism at all times without his being entranced, the spiritual
existence becoming as much as the physical his normal state." pp. 7-18.
