An authentic record of the "Tyrone," or "Beresford Apparition," will now
be given. It created a very great sensation at the time of its occurrence;
and the narrative which follows has been pronounced traditionally "true
and accurate" by a member of the family:--

"Lord Tyrone and Miss ---- were born in Ireland, and were left orphans in
their infancy to the care of the same person, by whom they were both
educated in the principles of deism. Their guardian dying when they were
each of them about fourteen years of age, they fell into very different
hands.

"The persons on whom the care of them now devolved, used every means to
eradicate the erroneous principles they had imbibed, and to persuade them
to embrace revealed religion, but in vain. Their arguments were strong
enough to stagger their former faith. Though separated from each other,
their friendship was unalterable, and they continued to regard each other
with a sincere and fraternal affection.

"After some years were elapsed, and both were grown up, they made a solemn
promise to each other that whichever should die first, would, if
permitted, appear to the other, to declare what religion was most approved
by the Supreme Being.

"Miss ---- was shortly after addressed by Sir Martin Beresford, to whom
she was after a few years married, but a change of condition had no power
to alter their friendship. The families visited each other, and often
spent some weeks together. A short time after one of these visits, Sir
Martin remarked, that when his lady came down to breakfast, her
countenance was disturbed, and inquired after her health. She assured him
she was quite well. He then asked her if she had hurt her wrist: 'Have you
sprained it?' said he, observing a black ribbon round it. She answered in
the negative, and added, 'Let me conjure you, Sir Martin, never to inquire
the cause of my wearing this ribbon; you will never see me without it. If
it concerned you as a husband to know, I would not for a moment conceal
it: I never in my life denied you a request, but of this I entreat you to
forgive me the refusal, and never to urge me further on the subject.'
'Very well,' said he, smiling; 'since you beg me so earnestly, I will
inquire no more.'

"The conversation here ended; but breakfast was scarcely over when Lady
Beresford eagerly inquired if the post was come in; she was told it was
not. In a few minutes she rang again and repeated the inquiry. She was
again answered as at first. 'Do you expect letters?' said Sir Martin,
'that you are so anxious for the arrival of the post?' 'I do,' she
answered, 'I expect to hear that Lord Tyrone is dead; he died last Tuesday
at four o'clock.' 'I never in my life,' said Sir Martin, 'believed you
superstitious; some idle dream has surely thus alarmed you.' At that
instant the servant entered and delivered to them a letter sealed with
black. 'It is as I expected,' exclaimed Lady Beresford, 'Lord Tyrone is
dead.' Sir Martin opened the letter; it came from Lord Tyrone's steward,
and contained the melancholy intelligence of his master's death, and on
the very day and hour Lady Beresford had before specified. Sir Martin
begged Lady Beresford to compose herself, and she assured him she felt
much easier than she had done for a long time; and added, 'I can
communicate intelligence to you which I know will prove welcome; I can
assure you, beyond the possibility of a doubt, that I shall in some months
present you with a son.' Sir Martin received this news with the greatest
joy.

"After some months Lady Beresford was delivered of a son (she had before
been the mother of only two daughters). Sir Martin survived the birth of
his son little more than four years.

"After his decease his widow seldom left home; she visited no family but
that of a clergyman who resided in the same village; with them she
frequently passed a few hours; the rest of her time was spent in solitude,
and she appeared determined for ever to banish all other society. The
clergyman's family consisted of himself, his wife, and one son, who at the
time of Sir Martin's death was quite a youth; to this son, however, she
was after a few years married, notwithstanding the disparity of years and
the manifest imprudence of a connexion so unequal in every point of view.

"Lady Beresford was treated by her young husband with contempt and
cruelty, while at the same time his conduct evinced him the most abandoned
libertine, utterly destitute of every principle of virtue and humanity. By
this, her second husband, she had two daughters; after which such was the
baseness of his conduct that she insisted on a separation. They parted for
a few years, when so great was the contrition he expressed for his former
conduct, that, won over by his supplications, promises, and entreaties,
she was induced to pardon, and once more to reside with him, and was in
time the mother of a son.

"The day on which she had lain-in a month being the anniversary of her
birthday, she sent for Lady Betty Cobb (of whose friendship she had long
been possessed), and a few other friends, to request them to spend the day
with her. About seven, the clergyman by whom she had been christened, and
with whom she had all her life been intimate, came into the room to
inquire after her health. She told him she was perfectly well, and
requested him to spend the day with them; for, said she, 'This is my
birthday. I am forty-eight to-day.' 'No, madam,' answered the clergyman,
'you are mistaken; your mother and myself have had many disputes
concerning your age, and I have at last discovered that I was right. I
happened to go last week into the parish where you were born; I was
resolved to put an end to the dispute; I searched the register, and find
that you are forty-seven this day.' 'You have signed my death warrant,'
she exclaimed; 'I have then but a few hours to live. I must therefore
entreat you to leave me immediately, as I have something of importance to
settle before I die.'

"When the clergyman had left her, Lady Beresford sent to forbid the
company coming, and at the same time to request Lady Betty Cobb and her
son (of whom Sir Martin was the father, and who was then about twenty-two
years of age), to come to her apartment immediately. Upon their arrival,
having ordered the attendants to quit the room, 'I have something,' she
said, 'of the greatest importance to communicate to you both before I die,
a period which is not far distant. You, Lady Betty, are no stranger to
the friendship which subsisted between Lord Tyrone and myself: we were
educated under the same roof and in the same principles of deism. When the
friends, into whose hands we afterwards fell, endeavoured to persuade us
to embrace Revealed Religion, their arguments, though insufficient to
convince, were powerful to stagger our former feelings, and to leave us
wavering between the two opinions: in this perplexing state of doubt and
uncertainty, we made a solemn promise to each other that whichever died
first should (if permitted) appear to the other, and declare what religion
was most acceptable to God; accordingly, one night, while Sir Martin and
myself were in bed, I suddenly awoke and discovered Lord Tyrone sitting by
my bedside. I screamed out and endeavoured to awake Sir Martin. "For
Heaven's sake," I exclaimed, "Lord Tyrone, by what means or for what
reason came you hither at this time of night?" "Have you then forgotten
our promise?" said he; "I died last Tuesday at four o'clock, and have been
permitted by the Supreme Being to appear to you to assure you that the
Revealed Religion is true, and the only religion by which we can be saved.
I am further suffered to inform you that you will soon produce a son, who
it is decreed will marry my daughter; not many years after his birth Sir
Martin will die, and you will marry again, and to a man by whose
ill-treatment you will be rendered miserable: you will have two daughters
and afterwards a son, in childbirth of whom you will die in the
forty-seventh year of your age." "Just Heavens!" I exclaimed, "and cannot
I prevent this?" "Undoubtedly," returned the spectre; "you are a free
agent, and may prevent it all by resisting every temptation to a second
marriage; but your passions are strong, you know not their power; hitherto
you have had no trials. More I am not permitted to reveal, but if after
this warning you persist in your infidelity, your lot in another world
will be miserable indeed." "May I not ask," said I, "if you are happy?"
"Had I been otherwise," he replied, "I should not have been permitted to
appear to you." "I may, then, infer that you are happy?" He smiled. "But
how," said I, "when morning comes, shall I know that your appearance to me
has been real, and not the mere representation of my own imagination?"
"Will not the news of my death be sufficient to convince you?" "No," I
returned, "I might have had such a dream, and that dream accidentally come
to pass. I will have some stronger proofs of its reality." "You shall,"
said he, and waving his hand, the bed curtains, which were crimson velvet,
were instantly drawn through a large iron hoop by which the tester of the
bed was suspended. "In that," said he, "you cannot be mistaken; no mortal
arm could have performed this." "True," said I, "but sleeping we are often
possessed of far more strength than when awake; though waking I could not
have done it, asleep I might; and I shall still doubt." "Here is a
pocket-book; in this," said he, "I will write my name; you know my
handwriting." I replied, "Yes." He wrote with a pencil on one side of the
leaves. "Still," said I, "in the morning I may doubt; though waking I
could not imitate your hand, asleep I might." "You are hard of belief,"
said he. "Touch would injure you irreparably; it is not for spirits to
touch mortal flesh." "I do not," said I, "regard a slight blemish." "You
are a woman of courage," said he, "hold out your hand." _I did; he struck
my wrist: his hand was cold as marble; in a moment the sinews shrunk up,
every nerve withered._ "Now," said he, "while you live let no mortal eye
behold that wrist: to see it is sacrilege." He stopped; I turned to him
again; he was gone.

"'During the time I had conversed with him my thoughts were perfectly calm
and collected; but the moment he was gone I felt chilled with horror, the
very bed moved under me. I endeavoured, but in vain, to awake Sir Martin;
all my attempts were ineffectual, and in this state of agitation and
terror I lay for some time, when a shower of tears came to my relief and I
fell asleep.

"'In the morning Sir Martin arose and dressed himself as usual, without
perceiving the state the curtains remained in. When I awoke I found Sir
Martin gone down; I arose, and having put on my clothes, went to the
gallery adjoining the apartment and took from thence a long broom (such as
cornices are swept with); by the help of this I took down with some
difficulty the curtains, as I imagined their extraordinary position might
excite suspicion in the family. I then went to the bureau, took up my
pocket-book, and bound a piece of black ribbon round my wrist. When I came
down, the agitation of my mind had left an impression on my countenance
too visible to pass unobserved by my husband. He instantly remarked it,
and asked the cause; I informed him Lord Tyrone was no more, that he died
at the hour of four on the preceding Tuesday, and desired him never to
question me more respecting the black ribbon, which he kindly desisted
from after. You, my son, as had been foretold, I afterwards brought into
the world, and in little more than four years after your birth your
lamented father expired in my arms. After this melancholy event I
determined, as the only probable chance to avoid the sequel of the
prediction, for ever to abandon all society, to give up every pleasure
resulting from it, and to pass the rest of my days in solitude and
retirement. But few can long endure to exist in a state of perfect
sequestration: I began an intimacy with a family, and one alone; nor could
I foresee the fatal consequences which afterwards resulted from it. Little
did I think their son, their only son, then a mere youth, would form the
person destined by fate to prove my destruction. In a very few years I
ceased to regard him with indifference; I endeavoured by every possible
way to conquer a passion, the fatal effects of which I too well knew. I
had fondly imagined I had overcome its influence, when the evening of one
fatal day terminated my fortitude and plunged me in a moment down that
abyss I had so long been meditating how to shun. He had often solicited
his parents for leave to go into the army, and at last obtained
permission, and came to bid me adieu before his departure. The instant he
entered the room he fell upon his knees at my feet, told me he was
miserable, and that I alone was the cause. At that moment my fortitude
forsook me, I gave myself up as lost, and regarding my fate as inevitable,
without further hesitation consented to a union, the immediate result of
which I knew to be misery, and its end death. The conduct of my husband
after a few years amply justified a separation, and I hoped by these means
to avoid the fatal sequel of the prophecy: but won over by his reiterated
entreaties, I was prevailed upon to pardon and once more reside with him,
though not till after I had, as I thought, passed my forty-seventh year.

"'But alas! I have this day heard from indisputable authority that I have
hitherto lain under a mistake with regard to my age, and that I am but
forty-seven to-day. Of the near approach of my death then I entertain not
the slightest doubt; but I do not dread its arrival; armed with the sacred
precepts of Christianity I can meet the King of Terrors without dismay,
and without fear bid adieu to mortality for ever.

"'When I am dead, as the necessity for concealment closes with my life, I
could wish that you, Lady Betty, would unbind my wrist, take from thence
the black ribbon, and let my son with yourself behold it.' Lady Beresford
here paused for some time, but resuming the conversation she entreated her
son would behave himself so as to merit the high honour he would in future
receive from a union with the daughter of Lord Tyrone.

"Lady B. then expressed a wish to lay down on the bed and endeavour to
compose herself to sleep. Lady Betty Cobb and her son immediately called
her domestics and quitted the room, having first desired them to watch
their mistress attentively, and if they observed the smallest change in
her, to call instantly.

"An hour passed and all was quiet in the room. They listened at the door
and everything remained still, but in half an hour more a bell rang
violently; they flew to her apartment, but before they reached the door,
they heard the servants exclaim, 'Oh, she is dead!' Lady Betty then bade
the servants for a few minutes to quit the room, and herself with Lady
Beresford's son approached the bed of his mother; they knelt down by the
side of it; Lady Betty lifted up her hand and untied the ribbon,--_the
wrist was found exactly as Lady Beresford had described it, every sinew
shrunk, every nerve withered_.

"Lady Beresford's son, as had been predicted, is since married to Lord
Tyrone's daughter. The black ribbon and pocket-book were formerly in the
possession of Lady Betty Cobb, Marlborough Buildings, Bath, who, during
her long life, was ever ready to attest the truth of this narration, as
are, to the present hour, the whole of the Tyrone and Beresford
families."[6]
