The acts and deeds of Mr. Daniel Home, a Scotchman, and of the Davenport
brothers, Americans, who figure very prominently as mediums in the
authentic records of the spiritualists, are tolerably well known by report
to many. From America, where the signs were first noticed, they came
eastwards to England and the European continent, in which places the
spiritual manifestations were even more remarkable than those which had
occurred and been testified to in the West. Under the direction of a
medium, people sat round a table, and by a silent invocation of spirits,
by "willing"[45] that they should come, they came, and produced the
following amongst other equally strange phenomena.[46] Large tables rose
to the ceiling, floating in the atmosphere with a sort of undulating
motion, and coming down again to the floor without noise; sprigs of
flowers were torn off and presented to people by the spirit; accordions
and other musical instruments were played without any visible hand holding
or moving them; luminous stars and streaks of light appeared in various
places, while "spirit hands" were seen and felt as palpably as mortal
flesh and blood could be; answers to questions made, were given by a
system of raps or by spelling out words on a child's alphabet placed on
the floor. Thus conversations, sometimes sensible, but frequently trivial
and absurd,[47] were held with the spirits summoned. Spirit hands, using
material pens, ink and paper, wrote answers to queries; quoted verses
from known authors, or put down original poems. In some cases the
narratives published were anonymous, and only authenticated by witnesses
who privately testified to the newspaper-editors their accuracy. But in
some instances persons of repute and ability came forward in support of
their correctness.[48] Dr. Gully of Malvern, for example, publicly
testified that he had seen Mr. Home float about a room for several
minutes, and guaranteed the accuracy of the facts set forth in a most
remarkable fashion in an early number of the "Cornhill Magazine." A
well-known clergyman of the High Church party in the Church of England,
gives his testimony to the truth and strangeness of certain appearances
and manifestations, in the following communication to the Editor of this
volume:--

"I was staying in the north of England with the Rev. ----, in 1850. During
my visit a well-known medium (at that period a clergyman of the diocese of
London) spent the evening with us. Eight or ten other people were there at
the same time. 'Table-turning' was the subject of a long and animated
discussion, in which those who accepted the facts and those who rejected
them were about equally divided. There was nothing to be done, therefore,
but to test the question. This was determined on. A circular table about
four feet in diameter, of considerable size and weight, was used. Seven
people sat round it, joining their hands on the table, and after
conjointly _willing_ that it should turn itself in one direction or be
turned, for about twelve minutes, it began to vibrate strangely and then
slowly to move. At first its motion was in circles, then it moved from
side to side of the room with dash and rapidity. Afterwards it was
strangely tilted on the other side. On one occasion later on, it rose
several inches from the ground, and remained suspended in the air for
nearly two minutes. As to the facts, no one could dispute them. Afterwards
a variety of questions were put, to which the table replied by knocking on
the floor. It was agreed beforehand that one knock should stand for 'No',
two for 'Yes.' An alphabet was produced, and words in response were
spelled out. Some of the queries were trivial, some arithmetical, some
momentous. The answers were usually accurate, sensible, and intelligible,
but not always so. After questions had been put concerning the future
state, heaven, hell, purgatory, the happiness of the good and the
punishment of the wicked, a question was asked, 'Where did the spirit now
answering dwell when on earth?' The name of a place in Devonshire was
spelled out. This reply greatly interested a clergyman present, who some
fifteen years previously had been curate in that county. It was followed
by another:--'What was the name of the person whose spirit is here?' Then
the table spelt out, by means of the alphabet, the name of a yeoman who
had died impenitent and blaspheming at the period before referred to. This
was sufficient for me," writes the above correspondent; "what I had heard
and seen convinced me that necromancy was practised. I left the house,
protecting myself by the sacred sign, convinced of the sin of the
practice. And though I had been a spectator and not an actor, I made a
resolution, which I have scrupulously kept, never to see nor sanction such
proceedings again."
