Another somewhat similar example is here recorded. A clergyman of the
Church of England, intimately known to the Editor of this volume, supplies
the following remarkable narrative regarding the action and authors of
Spiritualistic manifestations:--"Being a perfect and total sceptic as to
the supernatural character of so-called 'Spiritualism,' and believing that
the results asserted to be produced by its votaries were brought about by
pre-arranged trickery and the deception of confederates, I for a long time
declined to be present at, or to take part in, a _séance_, though
earnestly pressed to do so. However, circumstances led me to attend one in
the year 1862, at a house in Notting Hill Square, London, in the month of
October. Prior to the operations, which were managed and conducted by a
'medium,' I was invited to examine both the room where the _séance_ was to
be held, and the table by which the operations were to be conducted.
Conversations, held by a well-known spiritualist, were to be carried on,
(by means of an alphabet, raps and knockings,) with the spirits who were
presumed to be present, and who were declared to have miraculously moved
the table round which, for some time, seven persons, including myself, had
been sitting. The room was about ten feet in height, and in the centre was
a gas chandelier of three lights, all of which were burning. During the
sitting, after the table had made several most remarkable gyrations,
tilting one side of itself upwards and downwards at an angle of at least
forty-five degrees, at the command of the chief operator it slowly
ascended from the floor to the height of at least seven feet, viz. the
bottom of the pendent gaselier. Its plane having caused the lamp glasses
to rattle by contact, the table then with a strange throbbing and
vibration and slow movement began to descend. We had all removed our
chairs, to give room for its ascent, and standing close to the walls
around, saw it slowly come down to its place. I was so shocked and
horrified at what I beheld, and now so firmly convinced that the
remarkable actions we had witnessed were the result of the invocation and
intervention of evil spirits, that I declined, in language most positive
and unmistakable, to have any further part in such unlawful performances.
When further attempts were made to obtain fresh manifestations, taking
from my neck a small silver crucifix, which had been blessed by a high
ecclesiastical dignitary, I made a mental act of faith in the Blessed
Trinity, and holding the small crucifix in my closed hand, placed my hand
clasping it on the table, saying mentally, 'If this be the work of evil
spirits, may God Almighty, for Christ's sake, stop it!' The moment I did
this, the table, which had been moving about strangely in several
directions, and by varied singular motions, became suddenly and at once
motionless. Nor could it be made to stir afterwards. Being perfectly
convinced that such operations were of the nature of Necromancy, forbidden
by the Church, as Scripture plainly testifies, I made an earnest
exhortation to those in the room, after the last manifestation, not to
cooperate in such deeds any further. Some maintained by rather blasphemous
arguments that Spiritualism was destined to, and would soon, take the
place of Christianity; and were kind enough to pity my ignorance,
narrowness, prejudice, and sectarianism, to which I made no reply. I then
left."
