The testimony of Mr. Crookes, the discoverer of a new metal, and a Fellow
of the Royal Society, may here be suitably recorded. Unlike some other
so-called "scientific investigators," he is reported to have resolved upon
a careful and thorough examination of the spiritualistic phenomena. He is
said to have maintained originally that, even if the alleged facts were
true, he might be able to explain them by some natural law. Accordingly he
thoughtfully pursued his inquiries and investigations over a series of
years, taking unusual care to render deception out of the question and
impossible. The result has been given to the public in the "Quarterly
Journal of Science" for January, 1874,[50] from which the following
quotations are made:--

"The phenomena I am prepared to attest are so extraordinary and so
directly oppose the most firmly-rooted articles of scientific
belief--amongst others, the ubiquity and invariable action of the law of
gravitation--that, even now, on recalling the details of what I witnessed,
there is an antagonism in my mind between _reason_, which pronounces it to
be scientifically impossible, and the consciousness that my senses, both
of touch and sight--and these corroborated, as they were, by the senses of
all who were present--are not lying witnesses when they testify against my
preconceptions. But the supposition that there is a sort of mania or
delusion which suddenly attacks a whole roomful of intelligent persons who
are quite sane elsewhere, and that they all concur to the minutest
particulars in the details of the occurrences of which they suppose
themselves to be witnesses, seems to my mind more incredible than even the
facts they attest" (pp. 77-78).

Under the heading of "The Phenomena of Percussive and other Allied
Sounds," he makes reference to the raps and knocks of various kinds made
and heard in different places, "in a living tree, on a sheet of glass, on
a stretched iron wire, on a stretched membrane, a tambourine, on the roof
of a cab, and on the floor of a theatre," and where no known law, and no
contrivance or trickery, could afford any clue to their cause. He then
inquires whether the sounds thus heard are the result of some blind,
irrational, hidden material force obeying the Laws of Nature. His
conclusion, however, was that the varied phenomena being evidently
governed by intelligence, a thinking being must have been concerned in
their origination. "The intelligence," he maintains, "is sometimes of such
a character as to lead to the belief that it does not emanate from any
person present." The movement of heavy substances at a distance from the
medium is then discussed, and Mr. Crookes thus writes:--

"On three successive evenings a small table moved slowly across the room,
under conditions which I had specially pre-arranged, so as to answer any
objections which might be raised to the evidence" (p. 84).

Again:--"On five separate occasions a heavy dining-table rose between a
few inches and one and a half feet off the floor, under special
circumstances which rendered trickery impossible. On another occasion a
heavy table rose from the floor in full light, while I was holding the
medium's hands and feet. On another occasion the table rose from the
floor, not only when no person was touching it, but under conditions that
I had pre-arranged, so as to assure unquestionable proof of the fact" (p.
85).

Once more:--

"On one occasion I witnessed a chair, with a lady sitting on it, rise
several inches from the ground. On another occasion, to avoid the
suspicion of this being in some way performed by herself, the lady knelt
on the chair in such manner that its four feet were visible to us. It then
rose about three inches, remained suspended for about ten seconds, and
then slowly descended. At another time two children, on separate
occasions, rose from the floor with their chairs, in full daylight, under
(to me) most satisfactory conditions; for I was kneeling and keeping close
watch upon the feet of the chair, and observing that no one might touch
them" (p. 85).
