Respecting another class of phenomena, said to be common enough with
Modern Spiritualists, which appeal to the sense of sight, under the head
of "Luminous Appearances," Mr. Crookes thus writes:--

"Under the strictest test conditions I have seen a solid self-luminous
body, the size and nearly the shape of a turkey's egg, float noiselessly
about the room, at one time higher than anyone present could reach
standing on tip-toe, and then gently descend to the floor. It was visible
for more than ten minutes, and before it faded away it struck the table
three times, with a sound like that of a hard, solid body. During this
time the medium was lying back, apparently insensible, in an easy-chair.

"I have seen luminous points of light darting about and settling on the
heads of different persons; I have had questions answered by the flashing
of a bright light a desired number of times in front of my face. I have
seen sparks of light rising from the table to the ceiling, and again
falling upon the table, striking it with an audible sound. I have had an
alphabetical communication given by luminous flashes occurring before me
in the air, whilst my hand was moving about amongst them. I have seen a
luminous cloud floating upwards to a picture. Under the strictest test
conditions, I have more than once had a solid, self-luminous crystalline
body placed in my hand by a hand which did not belong to any person in the
room. In the light, I have seen a luminous cloud hover over a heliotrope
on a side-table, break a sprig off, and carry the sprig to a lady; and on
some occasions I have seen a similar luminous cloud visibly condense to
the form of a hand, and carry small objects about" (p. 87).

Two pages later on the following occurs:--

"I was sitting next to the medium, Miss Fox, the only other persons
present being my wife and a lady relative, and I was holding the medium's
two hands in one of mine, whilst her feet were resting on my feet. Paper
was on the table before us, and my disengaged hand was holding a pencil.
A luminous hand came down from the upper part of the room, and after
hovering near me for a few seconds, took the pencil from my hand, rapidly
wrote on a sheet of paper, threw the pencil down, and then rose up over
our heads, gradually fading into darkness" (p. 89).
