The conviction that such acts and deeds are the work of evil spirits is
put on record in the same serial, a formal organ of the Spiritualists, in
the following narrative:--

"Mr. and Mrs. C---- attend a _séance_ at which the spirit of 'a darling
child' is manifestly present. They attend a second _séance_, and through
the same medium they are confirmed in the conviction of the real presence
of their child. Mr. C---- then finds that he is himself a medium, and
forthwith he purchases a small table for the exercise of his power.

"His first experiment proves to him beyond a doubt that an intelligent
being, though invisible, is with him; but he speedily begins to suspect
that whatever the character may have been of the spirit which first
manifested to him through another medium, this, which is now communicating
through himself, is an evil spirit. On his 'wishing it to walk to the
dining-room, it started at once.' He was struck by its heavy tread, 'so
very unlike the footfalls of a young child,' and he exclaimed, 'This is
_not_ the spirit of my child, if so, I want no other manifestation.'
Becoming more and more suspicious of the character of this particular
visitant, he said, 'If thou art not the spirit of my child, march out of
the house.' 'The table did, indeed, march, making a noise like the loud
and well-measured footfalls of a heavy dragoon--literally shaking
everything in the room.'

"This gentleman then adjured the spirit in a variety of forms, and asked
if it was not a bad spirit? and it said, 'Yes!' Then he said, 'Accursed
devil! by the living God I adjure thee to speak the truth! Has the spirit
of my child _ever_ been put in communication with myself or her mother
through this or any other table?' The 'accursed devil' said, 'No, never!'
Then, after similar assurances, Mr. C---- made up his mind to believe the
devil; and he closed his experiments with an auto-da-fé, by breaking up
and burning the table!"

Mr. Chevalier, who was the first witness called before the committee
appointed by the Dialectical Society, gives the following personal version
of this experiment, 20th July, 1869. He stated that he had had seventeen
years' experience of Spiritualism, but it was not till 1866 that he
commenced experimenting on tables. He obtained the usual phenomena, such
as raps and tiltings and answers to questions. On one occasion, the answer
which was given being obviously untrue, the witness peremptorily inquired
why a correct answer had not been given, and the spirit in reply said,
"Because I am Beelzebub." Mr. Chevalier, in continuation, said, "I
continued my experiments until I heard of the 'Spiritual Athenæum.' About
that time I lost a child, and heard my wife say she had been in
communication with its spirit. I cautioned her, and yet was anxious to
communicate also. I placed one finger on the table; it moved, and the name
of the child was given. It was a French name. I told a friend of mine what
had happened, but was laughed at by him; he however came, sceptic as he
was. I placed one hand on the table asking mental questions, which were
all answered. He then asked where my child went to school, not knowing
himself, and the answer 'Fenton' was given; this also was correct.
Frequently after this, I obtained manifestations in French and English,
and messages as a child could send to a parent. At my meals I constantly
rested my hand on a small table, and it seemed to join in the
conversation. One day the table turned at right angles, and went into the
corner of the room. I asked, 'Are you my child?' but obtained no answer. I
then said, 'Are you from God?' but the table was still silent. I then
said, 'In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, I command you to
answer--are you from God?' One loud rap, a negative, was then given. 'Do
you believe,' said I, 'that Christ died to save us from sin?' The answer
was 'No!' 'Accursed spirit,' said I, 'leave the room.' The table then
walked across the room, entered the adjoining one and quickened its steps.
It was a small tripod table. It walked with a sidelong walk. It went to
the door, shook the handle, and I opened it. The table then walked into
the passage, and I repeated the adjuration, receiving the same answer.
Fully convinced that I was dealing with an accursed spirit, I opened the
street door, and the table was immediately silent; no movement or rap was
heard. I returned alone to the drawing-room, and asked if there were any
spirits present. Immediately I heard steps like those of a little child
outside the door. I opened it, and the small table went into the corner as
before, just as my child did when I reproved it for a fault. These
manifestations continued until I used the adjuration, and I always found
that they changed or ceased when the Name of God was mentioned. One night,
when sitting alone in my drawing-room, I heard a noise at the top of the
house; a servant who had heard it came into the room frightened. I went to
the nursery and found that the sounds came from a spot near the bed. I
pronounced the adjuration and they instantly ceased. The same sounds were
afterwards heard in the kitchen, and I succeeded in restoring quiet as
before.

"Reflecting on these singular facts, I determined to inquire further and
really satisfy myself that the manifestations were what I suspected them
to be. I went to Mrs. Marshall, and took with me three clever men, who
were not at all likely to be deceived. I was quite unknown; we sat at a
table, and had a _séance_: Mrs. Marshall told me the name of my child. I
asked the spirit some questions, and then pronounced the adjuration. We
all heard steps, which sounded as if someone was mounting the wall; in a
few seconds the sounds ceased, and although Mrs. Marshall challenged again
and again, the spirits did not answer, and she said she could not account
for the phenomenon. In this case, I pronounced the adjuration mentally; no
person knew what I had done. At a _séance_, held at the house of a friend
of mine, at which I was present, manifestations were obtained, and, as I
was known to be hostile, I was entreated not to interfere. I sat for two
hours a passive spectator. I then asked the name of the spirit, and it
gave the name of my child. 'In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost,' said I, 'are you the spirit of my child?' It answered, 'No!' and
the word 'Devil' was spelled out."

Dr. Edmunds: "How were the names spelled out?"

Mr. Chevalier: "The legs rapped when the alphabet was called over. Mrs.
Marshall used the alphabet herself, and the table rapped when her pencil
came to the letters. My opinion of the phenomena is that the intelligence
which is put in communication with us is a fallen one. It is the Devil,
the Prince of the Powers of the air. I believe we commit the crime of
Necromancy when we take part in these spiritual _séances_."
