And again:--

"The Church of England and Spiritualism accord, but not in the doctrine of
the resurrection of the body. The spirits all assert with S. Paul, that
the body which rises from the death-bed is the spiritual body, and that
the soul needs no other, much less an earthly body, in its
spirit-home--that, in fact, nothing of the earth can ever enter heaven.
That if the spirits of just men are _made perfect_, they can be nothing
more, and no addition of anything belonging to this earth can add to their
happiness, freedom, power, and perfection, but on the contrary. That so
far from receiving at some indefinite and, probably, very distant period,
their earthly bodies back again, they are continually, as they advance,
casting off the subtler particles of matter that have interpenetrated
their spiritual bodies."[56]

With regard to the influence of the Protestant Reformation on that temper
of mind and habit of thought which have led sceptics and those whose faith
has been overturned by the blasphemies of Calvin or the immoral principle
of the Lutheran systems and their offshoots, to become votaries of
Spiritualism, we cannot do better than put on record Mr. Howitt's
deliberate judgment, expressed in language which, however painful to read
in some parts, is at once forcible and pertinent:--

"By the denial of the intermediate states, the Protestant Reformers
perpetrated a more monstrous outrage on the Divine justice, and more
frightfully libelled the Divine mercy, than by the broadest stretch of
imagination one would have thought it possible. By this arbitrary
extinction of some of the loveliest regions of creation, by this wiping
out of vast kingdoms of God's tolerance and goodness by the sponge of
Protestant reaction, God's whole being was blackened, and every one of His
eternal attributes dislocated and driven pell-mell into the limbo of
Atheism. I say Atheism, for such a God could not possibly exist as this
Protestant theory would have made Him--a God with less justice than the
most stupid country squire ever established in the chair of magistracy;
with less mercy than an inquisitor or a torturer with his red-hot pincers
and iron boots. These atrocities were but the work of moments, but this
system made the God of love and the Father of Jesus Christ sitting in
endless bliss amid a favoured few, whilst below were incalculable
populations suffering the tortures of fires which no period even of
millions of years should extinguish, and that without any proportion
whatever to the offences of the sufferers! All who were not 'spirits of
just men made perfect' were, according to this doctrine, only admissible
to this common hell, this common receptacle of the middling, bad, and the
most bedevilled of devils! Never could any such monstrous, foul, and
detestable doctrine issue from any source but that of the hearts of
fiends themselves. None but devils could breed up so black a fog of
blasphemy to blot out the image of a loving and paternal God from the view
of His creatures. And yet the mocking devil induced the zealous Protestant
fathers to accept this most truly 'doctrine of devils,' as an antidote to
Popish error. As some glimmering of the direst consequences of this
shutting-up of the middle states of the invisible world began to dawn on
the Protestant mind, it set about to invent remedies and apply
palliatives, and by a sort of spiritual hocus-pocus, it taught that if the
greatest sinners did but call on Christ at the last gasp, they were
converted into saints, and found themselves in heaven itself with God and
the Lamb. This was only making the matter worse, and holding out a premium
for the continuance in every sin and selfishness to the last moment. It
was an awful temptation to self-deception presented to human selfishness.
Millions, no doubt, have trusted to this wretched Protestant reed.... Yet
common sense in others rejected and rejects the cruel deceit. A country
poet, writing the epitaph of the blacksmith in my native village,
expressed the truth on the Protestant theory of no middle regions:--

  'Too bad for heaven, too good for hell,
   So where he's gone we cannot tell.'"

And now to conclude this portion of our subject, regarding which not a
tenth part of the examples of "Spiritual" manifestations gathered has been
given. To have discussed the facts and theories provided on previous
pages, would have occupied several chapters. Sufficient, however, is
recorded to show that Spiritualism is directly antagonistic to the
Christian Religion,[57] to point out the true character of many of the
signs and wonders which exist in this nineteenth century, and which
testify and witness to old and unchangeable truths. The ministry of "men
and of angels in a wonderful order,"[58] the practice of exorcism, the
facts of diabolical agency, possession by evil spirits, the sins of
Witchcraft and Necromancy, are all more or less intertwined with the
Divine Revelation which God has been pleased to give to man. But the
Materialism of these latter days is blinding men's eyes, that they cannot
see, and successfully destroying their faith in all that is beyond their
cramped and narrow temporal range. Intellectual Paganism, and a positive
disbelief in the distinct Nature of God, if not openly professed, is
indirectly acknowledged; while the Faith of Pentecost, which for
generations has regenerated the World, is cast aside as worn out, effete,
and valueless. The possibility of miracle is derided; Providence is
scouted as the fond dream of an exaggerated human self-love; belief in the
power of prayer is asserted to be only a superstition, illustrative of
man's ignorance of the scientific conception of law; the hypothesis of
absolute invariable law, and the cognate conception of Nature as a
self-evolved system of self-existent forces and self-existent matter, are
ideas advancing with giant strides. Side by side with all this, however,
stand the portentous phenomena referred to here. Let the existence of one
course of such facts as those related be granted, and far more follows
than the pure Materialist or the Positivist would for a moment allow. Yet
none can deny the presence amongst us of such, evil in their essence and
mischievous in their operations. The whole cycle represents the works of
the Devil and his angels--works opposed at every step in theory by the
Truths of Christianity, and in fact by the sacraments of the Church
Universal. Man's highest and chiefest duty is to do the Will of the Most
High: the practice of the Spiritualists, on the other hand (and let men
lay the warning to heart), appears to be an intentional and systematic
giving up of their wills to the evil one; an invocation of evil spirits
for unlawful purposes, a "willing" for supernatural intervention in things
which are not lawful, and a deliberate turning away from Him to Whom all
power is given in Heaven and in Earth.

