The following Letter appeared in "The Times" newspaper a few years ago:--

"SIR,--Having been named by several of your correspondents as one of the
scientific men who believe in Spiritualism, you will perhaps allow me to
state briefly what amount of evidence has forced the belief upon me. I
began the investigation about eight years ago, and I esteem it a fortunate
thing that at that time the more marvellous phenomena were far less
common and less accessible than they are now, because I was led to
experiment largely at my own house, and among friends whom I could trust,
and was able to establish to my own satisfaction, by means of a great
variety of tests, the occurrence of sounds and movements not traceable to
any known or conceivable physical cause. Having thus become thoroughly
familiar with these undoubtedly genuine phenomena, I was able to compare
them with the more powerful manifestations of several public mediums, and
to recognize an identity of cause in both by means of a number of minute
but highly characteristic resemblances. I was also able, by patient
observation, to obtain tests of the reality of some of the more curious
phenomena which appeared at the time, and still appear to me, to be
conclusive. To go into details as to those experiences would require a
volume, but I may, perhaps, be permitted briefly to describe one, from
notes kept at the time, because it serves as an example of the complete
security against deception which often occurs to the patient observer
without seeking for it.

"A lady who had seen nothing of the phenomena asked me and my sister to
accompany her to a well-known public medium. We went, and had a sitting
alone in the bright light of a summer's day. After a number of the usual
raps and movements, our lady friend asked if the name of the deceased
person she was desirous of communicating with, could be spelt out. On
receiving an answer in the affirmative, the lady pointed successively to
the letters of a printed alphabet while I wrote down those at which three
affirmative raps occurred. Neither I nor my sister knew the name the lady
wished for, nor even the names of any of her deceased relatives; her own
name had not been mentioned, and she had never been near the medium
before. The following is exactly what happened, except that I alter the
surname, which was a very unusual one, having no authority to publish it.
The letters I wrote down were of the following kind:--yrnehnospmoht. After
the first three--yrn--had been taken down, my friend said, "This is
nonsense, we had better begin again." Just then her pencil was at e, and
raps came, when a thought struck me (having read of, but never witnessed,
a similar occurrence), and I said, 'Please go on, I think I see what is
meant.' When the spelling was finished I handed the paper to her, but she
could see no meaning in it till I divided it at the first h, and asked her
to read each portion backwards, when to her intense astonishment the name
'Henry Thompson' came out, that of a deceased son of whom she had wished
to hear, correct in every letter. Just about that time I had been hearing
_ad nauseam_ of the superhuman acuteness of mediums who detect the letters
of the name the deluded visitors expect, notwithstanding all their care to
pass the pencil over the letters with perfect regularity. This experience,
however (for the substantial accuracy of which as above narrated I vouch),
was and is, to my mind, a complete disproof of every explanation yet given
of the means by which the names of deceased persons are rapped out. Of
course I do not expect any sceptic, whether scientific or unscientific, to
accept such facts, of which I could give many, on my testimony; but
neither must they expect me, nor the thousands of intelligent men to whom
equally conclusive tests have occurred, to accept their short and easy
methods of explaining them.

"If I am not occupying too much of your valuable space I should like to
make a few remarks on the misconceptions of many scientific men as to the
nature of this inquiry, taking the Letters of your correspondent Mr. Dirks
as an example. In the first place, he seems to think that it is an
argument against the facts being genuine that they cannot all be produced
and exhibited at will; and another argument against them, that they cannot
be explained by any known laws. But neither can catalepsy, the fall of
meteoric stones, nor hydrophobia be produced at will; yet these are all
facts, and none the less so that the first is sometimes imitated, the
second was once denied, and the symptoms of the third are often greatly
exaggerated, while none of them is yet brought under the domain of strict
science; yet no one would make this an argument for refusing to
investigate these subjects. Again, I should not have expected a scientific
man to state, as a reason for not examining it, that Spiritualism 'is
opposed to every known natural law, especially the law of gravity,' and
that it 'sets chymistry, human physiology, and mechanics at open
defiance;' when the facts simply are that the phenomena, if true, depend
upon a cause or causes which can overcome or counteract the action of
these several forces, just as some of these forces often counteract or
overcome others; and this should surely be a strong inducement to a man of
science to investigate the subject.

"While not laying any claim myself to the title of 'a really scientific
man,' there are some who deserve that epithet who have not yet been
mentioned by your correspondents as at the same time spiritualists. Such I
consider the late Dr. Robert Chambers, as well as Dr. Elliotson, Professor
William Gregory, of Edinburgh; and Professor Hare, of Philadelphia--all
unfortunately deceased; while Dr. Gully, of Malvern, as a scientific
physician, and Judge Edmonds, one of the best American lawyers, have had
the most ample means of investigation; yet all these not only were
convinced of the reality of the most marvellous facts, but also accepted
the theory of Modern Spiritualism as the only one which would embrace and
account for the facts. I am also acquainted with a living physiologist, of
high rank as an original investigator, who is an equally firm believer.

"In conclusion I may say that, although I have heard a great many
accusations of imposture, I have never detected it myself; and, although a
large proportion of the more extraordinary phenomena are such that, if
impostures, they could only be performed by means of ingenious apparatus
or machinery, none has ever been discovered. I consider it no exaggeration
to say that the main facts are now as well established and as easily
verifiable as any of the more exceptional phenomena of nature which are
not yet reduced to law. They have a most important bearing on the
interpretation of History, which is full of narratives of similar facts,
and on the nature of life and intellect, on which physical science throws
a very feeble and uncertain light; and it is my firm and deliberate belief
that every branch of philosophy must suffer till they are honestly and
seriously investigated, and dealt with as constituting an essential
portion of the phenomena of human nature.

  "I am, Sir, yours obediently,
  "ALFRED R. WALLACE."
