The following Review, taken from the "Weekly Register" of August 1, 1874,
will be read with interest:--

"The May and June numbers of the 'Fortnightly Review' for 1874, contain
two remarkable articles by Mr. Wallace, the eminent naturalist. They are
entitled--'A Defence of Modern Spiritualism.' His aim in these is to prove
the objective reality of its phenomena in the first instance, and then to
show that the theory which explains them can be accepted by those who,
like himself, entirely disbelieve in a Supernatural order. He points out
that Modern Spiritualism is not in any way a survival or revival of old
superstitions, but a completely new science. The facts upon which it rests
have been known and noted from the earliest beginnings of history, but,
owing to the influence of Superstition, were almost universally
misinterpreted. Now, at last, these mists are clearing away. We have
abundant materials upon which to work, and he looks forward with
confidence to the establishment of a satisfactory scientific theory of a
future life. Such a theory will be a truly regenerating influence,
resting, not on arbitrary beliefs, but on established facts, and will, for
the first time, make a true religion possible and a pure morality.

"At the close of the second essay, there is a sketch of the outline of the
theory up to the point which it has reached as yet. Of course there is
still much which requires to be explained and developed. The science is
only in its infancy; but still its principles can be understood and
appreciated. It is taken for granted that there are no spirits but human
ones, these being the only spirits of which we can have any scientific
knowledge. This being assumed, Mr. Wallace proceeds to give a short
analysis of human nature, drawn from generalizations from the 'phenomena
in their entirety,' and the communications of the spirits themselves. This
is contained in four propositions:--

"1. Man is a duality, consisting of an organized spiritual form evolved
coincidently with and permeating the physical body, and having
corresponding organs and development.

"2. Death is the separation of this duality, and effects no change in the
spirit, morally or intellectually.

"3. Progressive evolution of the intellectual and moral nature is the
destiny of individuals; the knowledge, attainments, and experience of
earth-life forming the basis of spirit-life.

"4. Spirits can communicate through properly-endowed mediums. They are
attracted to those they love or sympathise with.... But, as follows from
Clause 2, their communications will be fallible, and must be judged and
tested just as we do those of our fellow-men.

"From the acceptance of these propositions will result a far purer
morality than any which either Religious systems or Philosophy have yet
put forth, and with sanctions far more powerful and effective--'For the
essential teaching of Spiritualism is that we are all, in every act and
thought, helping to build up a "mental fabric" which will be and
constitute ourselves more completely after the death of the body than it
does now. Just as this fabric is well or ill built will our progress and
happiness be aided or retarded. There will be no imposed rewards and
punishments; but everyone will suffer the inevitable consequences of a
well or ill spent life. The well-spent life is that in which those
faculties which concern our personal physical well-being are subordinated
to those which regard our social and intellectual well-being and the
well-being of others; and that inherent feeling, which is so universal and
so difficult to account for, that those latter constitute our higher
nature, seems also to point to the conclusion that we are intended for a
condition in which the former will be almost wholly unnecessary, and will
gradually become rudimentary through disuse, while the latter will receive
a corresponding development. This teaching will make a man dread to give
way to passion, or falsehood, or a selfish and luxurious life--knowing
that the inevitable consequences of such habits are future misery and a
long and arduous struggle, in order to develop anew the faculties which
had been crippled by long disuse. He will be deterred from crime, knowing
that its unforeseen consequences may cause him ages of remorse, and his
bad passions perpetual torment, in a state of being in which mental
emotions cannot be drowned in the fierce struggles and sensual pleasures
of a physical existence. And these beliefs (unlike those of theology) will
have a living efficacy, because depending on facts occurring again and
again within the family circle, and so bringing home the realities of the
future life to the minds of even the most obtuse.' He asks us to 'contrast
this system of natural and inevitable reward and retribution, dependent
wholly on the proportionate development of our higher mental and moral
nature, with the arbitrary system of rewards and punishments dependent on
stated acts and beliefs only, as set forth by all dogmatic religions; and
who can fail to see that the former is in harmony with the whole order of
Nature--the latter opposed to it?' We cannot enter on the religious and
moral questions which this brief survey of Mr. Wallace's theory suggests,
but we wish to make some remarks on the 'facts' on which it is founded,
and his treatment of them. The point that strikes one most in these
articles is their evident sincerity. Mr. Wallace has become a believer in
Spiritualism in spite of deeply-rooted prejudices against it, and he is
anxious to deal thoroughly and impartially with all the facts connected
with it as far as he can, without contradicting the first principles of
his scientific creed. We can understand this limitation, for we, too, have
first principles--first principles of which we are so certain that no
seeming contradiction of them by facts could shake our belief. But the
difference between our position and his is that our first principles are
founded, not on facts of experience, but on a _belief_ that God has spoken
to us, and is speaking every day in the Church. Therefore, whatever God
has revealed becomes to us as a first principle, which, _à priori_, cannot
contradict facts, and which, as our knowledge increases, we more and more
find experimentally to harmonize with them and explain them. But the whole
of Mr. Wallace's theory is founded on the assumption that God does not
speak--that He, and all that concerns Him, is unknown and unknowable to
us; and this assumption rests, he would tell us, on facts--_i. e._ on his
view of the order of Nature. Now, what we wish to point out is, that
nothing which thus rests only on experience can, in any true sense, be
called a first principle. It is merely a wide generalization, which may,
any moment, be displaced by a still wider one. Mr. Lecky, in his 'History
of Rationalism,' asserts that the evidence in favour of the reality of
witchcraft would be irresistible, were we not convinced, on _à priori_
grounds, that witchcraft is a delusion. Once Mr. Wallace fully shared this
conviction, and found himself compelled, in his own words, to 'reject or
ignore' all this evidence. Now, Modern Spiritualism has enabled him to
accept all these, and other facts of a similar nature; and he expatiates
on the relief he feels in being able to open his eyes to a whole host of
things which he had hitherto been obliged painfully and laboriously to
overlook. There is quite a string of them. Socrates' Demon, the ancient
Oracles, all Miracles--those of the Bible, the lives of the Saints, and in
the present day, answers to prayer, all the phenomena of Second Sight,
Ghosts, and occult disturbances of all sorts. We cannot refer our readers
to the articles themselves for the explanations, some of them very
curious, of all these things. But we should like to ask whether it may not
be possible that there may be some theory yet to be found still more
comprehensive than Spiritualism, and which may yield a still deeper joy
and relief? The one before us seems to us still to require a considerable
amount of reserve, to say no more, in dealing with some of the facts.
Professor Huxley objects to the amount of twaddle that is talked by the
spirits; but to this Mr. Wallace replies, very justly, we think, that it
is no more than we must expect, considering the mental and moral calibre
of the majority of mankind; and, consequently, of spirits, who are not
much improved by the mere fact of dying, not to mention that of the
spiritualists themselves; and we know that the proverb, 'Like attracts
like,' is especially applicable to mediums. But we confess that we are
surprised when we are told that 'sectarian' spirits continue to maintain
special dogmas and doctrines, while yet quite unable to describe
themselves as being in any situation which at all corresponds to the
orthodox teaching about a future life. We cannot understand what doctrines
or dogmas could survive such a _désillusionnement_, whether agreeable or
the reverse, as Mr. Wallace's future life would be to a spirit whose
conceptions on the subject had been moulded on any form of Christianity.
Nor can we conceive of any motive, except a diabolical maliciousness,
which could prompt spirits to wish to keep up such delusions among their
surviving friends. And yet Mr. Wallace explains the apparitions of Our
Lady, &c., in modern times, as being produced by spirits with strong
Catholic predilections, knowing that they would be very efficacious in
stimulating the cultus which they prefer. And this is said without any
moral comment whatever. Also allowing, as he does, the reality of the
apparitions, though only of human origin, in the Bible and lives of the
saints, we are at a loss to see how he can say that orthodox notions of
heaven are never confirmed by spirits. We should have said that it was
precisely by them that most of these had been originated, not to say
confirmed. If his spirits are spirits, so are ours, and quite as worthy of
credit. These are only a few of the difficulties on the surface of
Sceptical Spiritualism. But we have already exceeded our limits. We will
only add that we cannot but hope that, Spiritualism being so far an
approach to truth that it admits an important class of facts which had
lately been very much denied and ignored, may, by the difficulties which
they raise, lead some minds to reconsider the position they have taken up
with regard to the Supernatural. There is no bridge across the chasm which
divides Faith from Unbelief, and yet in this World the edges are so close
that it is but a step, and we pass from darkness into light."



