In the year 1829, a club, known as the "Hell-Fire Club," consisting of
members of the university _in statu pupillari_,--formed in some respects
on the model of that existing in the last century, which met at Medmenham
Abbey,--was accustomed to meet twice a week at Brasenose College, in
Oxford. Unbelief at that time is said to have taken coarser forms there
than is the case now. Then it was less dangerous, because more gross and
revolting. The members of the Club, however, were not unsuccessful in
their imitation of the blasphemy, drunkenness and other sins which had so
notoriously characterized the older society. They met twice a week, and
each is reported to have endeavoured to outdo his fellow-member in rampant
blasphemy and sceptical daring. The meetings were kept so private, and
such judicious care was taken to preserve unity of thought and secrecy
amongst the various members, that the College authorities, though
partially aware of its existence, were said to be unable to interfere.

On the north side of the College runs a narrow lane, connecting the square
in which Brasenose College faces that of All Souls, with Turl Street.
Going towards the latter, on the left-hand side stands Brasenose, until it
is joined by the north portion of Lincoln College. On the other side is
the high garden wall of Exeter College. It is a dreary and dismal-looking
thoroughfare at best; and especially so at night. The windows of Brasenose
College are of a narrow Jacobean type, protected both by horizontal as
well as perpendicular stanchions. The lower windows, being almost level
with the street, were further secured by a coarse wire netting.

Towards midnight on a day in December in the year above-named, one of the
Fellows of Brasenose College was returning home, when as he approached he
saw a tall man apparently draped in a long cloak, and, as he imagined,
helping to assist some one to get out of the window. The window belonged
to the rooms of one who was reported to be a leading member of the
Hell-Fire Club. Being one of the authorities of the College, he
instinctively rushed forward to detect what he imagined to be the
perpetration of a distinct breach of the rules, when (as he himself
afterwards declared) a thrill of horror seized him in a moment, and he
felt all at once convinced that it was no human being at whom, appalled
and fear-stricken, he looked. As he rushed past he saw the owner of the
rooms, as he conceived, being forcibly and strugglingly dragged between
the iron stanchions. The form, the features,[59] horribly distorted and
stamped with a look of indescribable agony, were vividly before him; and
the tall figure seemed to hold the frantic struggler in a strong grasp.

He rushed past, round to the chief entrance, knocked at the gate, and then
fell to the ground in a swoon. Just as the Porter opened it, there rose a
cry from a crowd of men trooping out from a set of rooms immediately to
the right of the Porter's lodge. They were members of the notorious
Hell-Fire Club. In the middle of a violent speech, as profane as it is
said to have been blasphemous, and with a frightful imprecation upon his
lips, a chief speaker (the owner of the rooms) had suddenly broken a
blood vessel, and was then lying dead on the floor.

The club in question, it is reported, never met again.[60]
