So much on this point. A few words are perhaps needed upon another. It may
be held by some that what has already been written on Witchcraft and
Necromancy is a melancholy instance of grovelling superstition on the part
of its Author.[61] Be it so. He is quite ready to avow his entire belief
in the express statements of Holy Scripture, and in the general Christian
tradition and teaching on the subject itself and all that is necessarily
involved in it. Those who believe in the existence of angels, "the
glorious battalions of the living God," and who frankly accept as truth
the various records of Holy Scripture, in which their ministry to mankind
is set forth, will likewise believe that S. Peter's exhortation to the
Early Christians did not simply embody a sentiment but declared a fact,
when he wrote: "Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil,
as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour."[62]

That the pagan nations owning and serving the Prince of this World, and
being supernaturally served by him in return, actively practised magic at
the time of our Blessed Saviour's first coming, is generally allowed. And
that the Christian writers of early times, more particularly S. Gregory
Thaumaturgus, admitted the reality and force of the sorcerers'
incantations and powers, is abundantly evident from their words and
reasoning. The case of the damsel of Thyatira, "possessed with a spirit of
divination," who "brought her masters much gain by soothsaying," clearly
establishes this point; and so does the apostle's authoritative
action:--"Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command
thee in the Name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the
same hour."[63]

When, three centuries after the Day of Pentecost, the Church of God
commenced numbering up her earliest triumphs, the soothsayers, the
diviners, and the dealers with evil spirits began to experience her
righteous and beneficent power. Constantine, urged to action by those who
sat in the seats of the apostles, formally sanctioned the condemnation of
magicians; but of course under Julian the Apostate, magic rites were not
only still commonly in vogue, but were publicly patronized. Later on,
Valentinian re-enacted the laws of Constantine; and under Theodosius the
severest penalties were likewise enforced against the practice of magic;
and, in truth, against every phase of pagan worship. But a general belief
in sorcery and divination remained powerful and active long after the
supreme and glorious victory of Christianity in the sixth century; and the
manner in which the authorities of the Christian Church met the belief,
and, by Sacraments and Sacramentals, aided the faithful to withstand the
legions of the Devil and his human allies, is perfectly familiar to the
student of history.

The well-known conviction that demons had appeared to mankind under the
names of sylvans, gnomes, and fauns was common enough amongst the Romans
prior to the revelation of Christianity; while the conviction that these
demons had sometimes made women the object of their passion was arrived at
by many. Justin Martyr and S. Augustine of Hippo[64] seem to imply
something of the sort; and marriage or commerce with demons was a charge
frequently made against witches, even from the earliest times.[65] It was
said that these demons owned a remarkable attachment to women with
beautiful hair,--a belief possibly founded on the passage in S. Paul's
First Epistle to the Corinthians,[66] in which he exhorts women to cover
their heads "because of the angels." In the middle ages the intercourse
of philosophers belonging to certain secret societies with sylphs and
salamanders was also believed by many:[67] and, later on, the study of
astrology, with its fatalistic theories, and the restoration of the
heresies of the Manichees, served to aid in more systematically
formulating that belief in witchcraft and the supernatural which was for
centuries so universal, and which never could have become so without a
sure and solid substratum of fact and truth.

Again, it is impossible to believe that the sorcerers of the Oriental
nations have been and are impostors. As regards those of modern Egypt, Mr.
Lane, in his interesting volume upon that country,[68] appears to have
settled the question by expressing his conviction of the truth and reality
of their supernatural performances. And similar conclusions have
reluctantly but most certainly been arrived at by those who, with some
knowledge and reasonable powers of observation, have witnessed the acts
and deeds of the Eastern dealers with evil spirits.
