With reference to Egypt, Mr. Lane's statement on the subject stands
thus:--

"A few days after my arrival in this country my curiosity was excited on
the subject of magic by a circumstance related to me by Mr. Salt, our
consul-general. Having had reason to believe that one of his servants was
a thief, from the fact of several articles of property having been stolen
from his house, he sent for a celebrated Maghrabee magician, with a view
of intimidating them, and causing the guilty one, (if any of them were
guilty,) to confess his crime. The magician came, and said that he would
cause the exact image of the person who had committed the thefts to appear
to any youth not arrived at the age of puberty; and desired the master of
the house to call in any boy whom he might choose. As several boys were
then employed in a garden adjacent to the house, one of them was called
for this purpose. In the palm of this boy's right hand, the magician drew
with a pen a certain diagram, in the centre of which he poured a little
ink. Into this ink he desired the boy steadfastly to look. He then burned
some incense, and several bits of paper inscribed with charms; and at the
same time called for various objects to appear in the ink. The boy
declared that he saw all these objects, and, last of all, the image of the
guilty person; he described his stature, countenance, and dress; said that
he knew him; and directly ran down into the garden, and apprehended one of
the labourers, who, when brought before the master, immediately confessed
that he was the thief."--P. 267.[69]

The performers themselves maintain, that they have been instructed in the
art by those who have traditionally received the knowledge step by step,
and period by period, from the old "magicians of Egypt;" and some frankly
allow, that they themselves are constantly attended and waited on by a
familiar spirit, demon, or genius, who actively aids them in their
performances, and who is, under certain circumstances, always prepared to
do their bidding.

These genii, or "Ginn" as they are called in Egypt, "are said to be of
pre-Adamite origin, and in their general properties," remarks Mr. Lane,
"are an intermediate class of beings between angels and men, but inferior
in dignity to both, created of fire, and capable of assuming the forms and
material fabric of men, brutes, and monsters; and of becoming invisible at
pleasure. They eat and drink, propagate their species (like or in
conjunction with human beings,) and are subject to death."... "The Ginn,"
continues Mr. Lane, "are supposed to pervade the solid matter of the
earth, as well as the firmament, where, approaching the confines of the
lowest heaven, they often listen to the conversation of the angels
respecting future things, thus enabling themselves to assist diviners and
magicians."--P. 222.
