In the twentieth chapter of his interesting and attractive volume, he
writes:--"I have met with many persons among the more intelligent of the
Egyptians who condemn these modern Psylli as impostors, but none who has
been able to offer a satisfactory explanation of the most common and most
interesting of their performances."--P. 383.

In another part of the book Mr. Lane concludes his chapter on "Magic"
thus:--"Neither I nor others have been able to discover any clue by which
to penetrate the mystery."[70]

So likewise as regards India,[71] it is impossible to set aside the facts,
which are testified to not by one but by hundreds, as to the supernatural
powers of the jugglers there. Identical in kind with the performances of
the magicians of Egypt before Pharaoh and in the presence of Moses and
Aaron, recorded in the Book of Exodus, the secret of the following
"tricks" (familiar to any one who has been in India) has been handed down
from father to son from the most remote ages; and we have no reason to
doubt that the source of the power by which these acts are done is one and
the same.

For instance:--The juggler, giving one of the spectators a coin to hold as
securely as possible within his hands, after pronouncing incantations in a
monotonous voice for some minutes, suddenly stops, still keeping his seat,
makes a rapid motion with his right hand, as if in the act of throwing
something at the person holding the coin, at the same time breathing with
his mouth upon him. Instantaneously the hands of the person taking part in
the performance are suddenly distended, while a horrible sensation of
holding something cold and disagreeable and nasty, is immediately felt,
forcing him to cast away the contents of his palms, which, to the horror
and disgust of uninitiated persons, turns out to be, not the coin which
before was there, but a live snake coiled up! The juggler then rises, and
catching the snake, which is now crawling and wriggling on the ground,
takes it by the tail, opens his mouth wide, and allows the snake to drop
into it. With deliberation he appears by degrees to swallow it, until the
whole, tail and all, completely disappears. He opens his mouth for the
spectators to investigate; but nothing is to be seen, neither does the
snake appear again.

Here is another instance:--A juggler will be brought to act before,
perhaps, many hundreds of people, of all ages, degrees, and religions,
including the soldiery of a garrison, in the public yard of a barrack. A
guard of soldiers will be placed around him, to prevent either trickery or
deception on his part, or interruption from the spectators. A little girl,
about eight or nine years old, accompanies the man, who is also provided
with a tall, narrow basket, three or four feet high, little more than a
foot in width, and open all the way up. The juggler, after some
altercation with the child, pretends to get angry, and lashing himself
into a fury, seizes hold of the child, and inverts the basket completely
over her. Thus placed completely at his mercy, and in spite of her screams
and entreaties, he draws his sword, and fiercely plunges it down into the
basket, and brings it out dripping with blood--or what apparently is such.
The child's screams become fainter and fainter, as again and again the
sword is thrust through the basket; and at length they gradually cease,
and everything is still. Then follows a critical moment for the supposed
murderer: and the exertions of the guard scarcely serve to save him from
the excited soldiery. When order is at length obtained, however, the man,
raising his bloody sword for an instant, strikes the basket with it, which
falls, and reveals--not a murdered child weltering in blood, but an empty
space, with no vestige left of the supposed victim. In a few moments the
identical little girl comes rushing--from whence no one can tell--to the
feet of the performer, with every sign of affection, and perfectly unhurt.
Be it observed that these performances commonly take place in India in
places where it is impossible for any contrivances or trap-doors to exist,
in the centre of court-yards at the various military stations, and before
innumerable witnesses.

Again: in Corea and China the practice of Necromancy is said to be almost
universal. An intelligent modern writer upon China gives an account, in
the following passage, of one mode in which questions are put, and answers
obtained, by a kind of divination:--Written communications from spirits
are not unfrequently sought for in the following manner: after the
presence and desired offices of some spirit are invoked, "two or more
persons support with their hands some object to which a pencil is attached
in a vertical position, and extending to a table below covered with sand.
It is said that the movements of the pencil, involuntary as far as the
persons holding it are concerned, but governed by the influences of
spirits, describe certain characters which are easily deciphered, and
which often bring to light remarkable disclosures and revelations. Many
who regard themselves as persons of superior intelligence are firm
believers in this mode of consulting spirits."[72]
