Here, as illustrating the common principles and course of action which are
adopted and followed in all parts of the World by those who seek
information by forbidden means, the following may be set forth:--

There is a dreary-looking House in one of the London Squares which is
reported to be haunted. And certainly this opinion, as the Editor can
testify from a careful personal enquiry, is tolerably current in the
neighbourhood. A Lady, curious about the fact, was present on an occasion
when certain inquiries were made regarding this House by means of
"Planchette,"--the instrument just referred to as so commonly used in
China. It is a small board, in shape like a heart, which is made to run
on two wheels or castors, and a hole is provided for a pencil so to be
placed with its point downward as that, when put upon a sheet of white
paper the point may just touch the surface. After the usual invocation or
incantation (or whatever it be), the persons who practise modern
divination place their hands on the board. Questions are put, and answers
given. No one touches the pencil, but the board is so guided, as the
Necromancers and Spiritualists assert, that the pencil is made to write
intelligible answers to expressed (and sometimes to mere mental) queries.
The following, printed _verbatim et literatim_, are in the handwriting of
the lady who witnessed them put and responded to, and are given as a fair
specimen of this mode of divination, now so generally practised in
England:--

    Is any house haunted in B---- Square? Yes.

    What killed the two people in the haunted room? Fright.

    What frightened them? Spirits.

    What kind of spirits? Yourself.

    How could any one be afraid of me? Without your body.

    Did they see them? Spirits not visible.

    How did they know they were there? Thought they saw them.

    Did they make them feel them? No.

    Then how did the spirits make themselves known--by what means?
    Mesmeric.

    Were you ever there? No.

    Why do those spirits haunt that house? Murder was committed there.

    Who was murdered, a man or a woman? A woman.

    What was the name of the woman? (Writing not intelligible.)

    Who murdered her? (Writing not intelligible.)

    Is he alive or dead? Dead.

    Is it the woman's spirit, or the man's, who haunts the house? Both.

    Was the man hung? No.

    Was the murder found out while he lived? No.

    Are you a bad spirit? Bad.

    Is it what the Bible calls "divination" to consult you in this way?
    Yes.

    Is it displeasing to God? Perhaps.

    Is it wrong? You know.

It is only right to add that those who made and obtained the foregoing
intelligible responses to intelligible questions, for good and sufficient
reasons came to hold such practices to be unlawful and wicked, and threw
the instrument by which they had been given into the Thames.
