On this subject, and all its details, no words of warning could be more
forcible than the following, which are quoted, in the hope that some who
may have been thoughtlessly induced to adopt the practices of Modern
Spiritualism, may be led at once to desist from the same:--

"Although good and evil spirits possess a powerful influence in the
government of the World, yet it is strictly forbidden, in the divine laws
of the Old and New Testament, to seek any acquaintance with them, or to
place ourselves in connection with and relation to them; and it is just as
little permitted for citizens of the world of spirits visibly to manifest
themselves to those who are still in the present state of existence,
without the express command or permission of the Lord. He, therefore, that
seeks intercourse with the invisible world sins deeply, and will soon
repent of it; whilst he that becomes acquainted with it, without his own
seeking and by Divine guidance, ought to beg and pray for wisdom, courage,
and strength, for he has need of all these; and let him that is introduced
into such a connection, by means of illness, or the aberration of his
physical nature, seek by proper means to regain his health, and detach
himself from intercourse with spirits."[73]

Yet, with many, and an increasing number, it is to be feared such advice
is wholly unheeded. For more than five-and-twenty years the subject of
Modern Spiritualism has been under discussion in England, and the facts on
which it has been founded have been before the World; but "having eyes men
see not, and having ears they hear not." Or, guided by the superficial
opinions of those whose one-eyed Materialism tinges so many of their
hap-hazard theories, they put aside a consideration of the astonishing
phenomena of the system of Spiritualism, and absolutely deny their
existence.[74] The age is shallow in its very incredulity. The wisdom of
the World is foolishness indeed.

When it is too late, when thousands upon thousands have become the active
votaries of Spiritualism, perhaps the bishops and clergy of the Church of
England may wake up to some realization of the enormous influence for
evil,[75] both dogmatic and moral, which this diabolical system cannot do
other than secure, and lift their testimony against it. Mahometanism is
not more directly anti-christian. Yet the numbers of those who believe in
Spiritualism are daily increasing, and the purblind policy of ignoring its
principles and action must very soon come to an end. Of course
Materialists and sceptics reasonably doubt; for otherwise their own
infallibility would ignominiously collapse. But for Christians, who
possess a copy of the "Holy Bible," and are able to read it, doubt seems
to me (I write with all due humility) simply inconsequent and irrational.

Here, let us turn from shadow to sunshine, from that which is evil to that
which is good; from the "lying wonders" of designing evil spirits, to the
glorious manifestations of God Almighty's power in the Christian
Church--for the one kind are but reasonable correlatives of the other.

And, for myself, I am free to confess that the evidence in favour of
certain of the recent miracles said to have been wrought in the Roman
Catholic portion of the One Family of God is not only convincing, but
conclusive. Having long given up attributing any value to the slanders and
misstatements of Protestant and infidel writers, I have attempted for
myself to investigate the principle of action, in the reception of
evidence and the decision of authority, which is taken at Rome, with
regard to such events and occurrences; and briefly give it as follows:--

The Congregation of Rites, which enquires into all miracles which demand
sanction, is presided over by the cardinal-vicar. It consists of
twenty-one cardinals of various nations, nine official prelates, nine
consulting prelates of various nations, all the fourteen Papal Masters of
Ceremonies, fourteen ordinary members, one secretary, one
deputy-secretary, and one notary and keeper of the archives--in all
seventy people. Four miracles are required to be distinctly proved for
Beatification; and two more for Canonization. All these must be proved by
eye, and not by ear-witnesses. In miracles where diseases have been cured,
it is required, 1st, That the disease must have been of an aggravated
nature, and difficult or impossible to be cured; 2ndly, that it was not on
the turn; 3rdly, that no medicine had been used, or if it had that it had
done no good; 4thly, the cure must be sudden; 5thly, it must be complete
and perfect; and 6thly, there must have been no crisis. In the process of
examination and enquiry, no step is taken, no doubt propounded, no fact
allowed, without many of the members of the Congregation being present:
and a printed Report is sent to all who may have been absent. Besides the
ordinary cross-examinations, which are always of a most scrutinizing
character, it is the sole duty of one of the leading members of the
Congregation, the _Promotor Fidei_, as he is termed, to raise objections,
and if possible to disprove every reported miracle. The members of this
Congregation are as keen, penetrating and business-like, and have as
complete a knowledge of the unconscious delusions of the human heart, as
any body of English jurymen. As ecclesiastical scholars they may be truly
said to be equal to the same number of English barristers; and the head of
the Congregation, for shrewdness, acuteness of intellect, and judicial
ability, is equal to any judge in England, who by his interpretation of
the law, and his particular sentence in a special case, wills away the
life or property of any Englishman. The subject has been treated at length
in the great work of Pope Benedict XIV. (A.D. 1740-1758) "On
Beatification," &c., as well as in the Decrees of Pope Urban VIII. and
Pope Clement XI.; and so sifting and careful has always been the
investigation, that Alban Butler asserts, on the authority of Daubenton,
that an English gentleman (not a Roman Catholic) being present and seeing
the process of several miracles, maintained them to have been completely
proved and perfectly incontestable, but was astonished beyond measure at
the scrupulosity of the scrutiny when authoritatively informed that _not
one of those which he had heard discussed_ had been allowed by the
Congregation to have been sufficiently proved.

Father Perrone, the distinguished living theologian, also asserts that
having shown the formal process for certain miracles to a lawyer of some
eminence (not a Roman Catholic) who after examination was perfectly
satisfied with both the testimony and the reasoning, the latter declared
that they would certainly stand before a British jury; but was mightily
astonished on hearing that the Congregation did not consider that evidence
to be sufficiently convincing and conclusive.

Similar investigations have been made in England, since the Reformation,
and this by ecclesiastical authority. For example: in the year before his
translation to the see of Norwich (_i. e._ in 1640), Dr. Joseph Hall, then
Bishop of Exeter, made a strict and judicial inquiry into all the
circumstances of the sudden and miraculous cure of a cripple at S.
Madron's Well, in Cornwall, and the following is the recorded conviction
of this pious prelate:--"The commerce which we have with the good spirits
is not now discerned by the eye, but is, like themselves, spiritual. Yet
not so, but that even in bodily occasions we have many times insensible
helps from them; in such a manner as that by the effects we can boldly
say, 'Here hath been an angel, though we see him not.' Of this kind was
that (no less than miraculous) cure which at S. Madron's, in Cornwall, was
wrought upon a poor cripple, John Trelille, where (besides the attestation
of many hundreds of neighbours), I took a strict and personal examination
in that last Visitation which I ever did or ever shall hold. This man,
that for sixteen years together was fain to walk upon his hands, by reason
of the close contraction of the sinews of his legs, (upon three
admonitions in a dream to wash in that well) was suddenly so restored to
his limbs, that I saw him able to walk and get his own maintenance. I
found here was neither art nor collusion: the thing done, the author
invisible."[76]

Now, whatever may be thought of the principles enunciated in Mr.
Lecky's[77] volumes on "The Rise and Influence of Rationalism," none can
deny either the marvellous faculty exhibited for gathering and marshalling
facts; while some portions of his thoughtful reflections do but put into
luminous language thoughts and convictions which find a cordial response
from many.
