APPENDIX TO CHAPTER X.

THE CLAIMS OF SCIENCE AND FAITH.

By my friend Mr. Hawker's obliging kindness I am enabled to publish the
following remarkable Letter:--

"To Mr. S. J----, Merchant, Plymouth.

"MY DEAR NEPHEW,--You ask me 'to put into one of my nutshells' the pith
and marrow of the controversy which at this time pervades the English mind
as to the claims of Science and Faith. Let me try: The material
universe--so the sages allege--is a vast assemblage of atoms or
molecules--'motes in the sunbeam' of Science, which has existed for
myriads of ages under a perpetual system of evolution, restructure, and
change. This mighty mass is traversed by the forces electrical, or
magnetic, or with other kindred names; and these by their incessant and
indomitable action are adequate to account for all the phenomena of the
world of matter, and of man. The upheaval of a continent; the drainage of
a sea; the creation of a metal; nay, the origin of life, and the
development of a species in plant, or animal, or man; these are the
achievements of fixed and natural laws among the atomic materials, under
the vibration of the forces alone. Thus far the vaunted discoveries of
Science are said to have arrived. Let us indulge them with the theory that
these results, for they are nothing more, are accurate and real. But
still, a thoughtful mind will venture to demand whence did these atoms
derive their existence? and from what, and from whom, do they inherit the
propensities wherewithal they are imbued? And tell me, most potent
seigniors, what is the origin of these forces? And with whom resides the
impulse of their action and the guidance of their control? 'Nothing so
difficult as a beginning.' Your philosopher is mute! he has reached the
horizon of his domain, and to him all beyond is doubt, and uncertainty,
and guess. We must lift the veil. We must pass into the border-land
between two Worlds, and there inquire at the Oracles of Revelation
touching the Unseen and Spiritual powers which thrill through the mighty
sacrament of the visible Creation. We perceive, being inspired, the realms
of surrounding space peopled by immortal creatures of air--

  'Myriads of spiritual things that walk unseen,
   Both when we wake and when we sleep.'

These are the existences, in aspect as 'young men in white garments,' who
inhabit the void place between the Worlds and their Maker, and their God.
Behold the battalions of the Lord of Hosts! the Workers of the sky! the
faithful and intelligent Vassals of God the Trinity! We have named them in
our own poor and meagre language 'the Angels,' but this title merely
denotes one of their subordinate offices--messengers from on high. The
Gentiles called them 'Gods,' but we ought to honour them by a name that
should embrace and interpret their lofty dignity as an intermediate army
between the kingdom and the throne; the Centurions of the stars, and of
men; the Commanders of the forces and their Guides. These are they that,
each with a delegated office, fulfil what their 'King invisible' decrees;
not with the dull, inert mechanism of fixed and natural law, but with the
unslumbering energy and the rational obedience of spiritual life. They
mould the atom; they wield the force; and, as Newton rightly guessed, they
rule the World of matter beneath the silent Omnipotence of God.

"'And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of
it reached to Heaven; and behold the angels of God ascending and
descending on it. And behold the Lord stood above it.'--Genesis xxviii.
12. _Tolle, Lege_, my dear nephew.

  "Your affectionate uncle,
  "R. S. HAWKER.

"Morwenstow Vicarage, Cornwall."



