(I.) Glanville tells a story regarding the appearance of a spirit in
fulfilment of a promise made during lifetime, which is full of point and
purpose. It runs thus. The substance, not the exact words, of the
narrative are here given:--In the seventeenth century there lived two
friends, Major George Sydenham of Dulverton in the county of Somerset, and
Captain William Dyke of the same county. They were both reputed to be
unbelievers in the Christian religion, if not avowed atheists. During the
civil wars they had each served under the Parliamentary generals, and took
an active part on the side of the rebels.

Having held many discussions both on the subject of religion and
irreligion, they eventually argued out the fact of the immortality of the
soul, which each felt disposed to deny: and finally they agreed between
themselves that whichever of them died first, should (if such a
possibility existed,) appear on the third day after death to the survivor
in Major Sydenham's summer-house at Dulverton, and enlighten him as to the
existence of a future state of rewards and punishments.

In due course Major Sydenham died; and Captain Dyke, in company with a
cousin of his own, a celebrated physician, who was attending a sick child
at Major Sydenham's house, but who knew nothing of the matter in hand,
arrived there. Captain Dyke and his relative Dr. Dyke, the physician,
occupied the same bedroom. The latter was surprised to hear the captain
ask of the servant for two of the largest candles that could be obtained,
and sought an explanation. The captain then informed him of his promise to
Major Sydenham, and of his own determined resolution to fulfil it. Dr.
Dyke urged with considerable force that as there was no warrant for making
such engagements, they were to be regarded as unquestionably wrong; and
pointed out, firstly, that evil spirits might take advantage of the
situation, and secondly, that such a tempting of the Almighty was
altogether wrong.

"This may be all very true," responded Captain Dyke, "but as I faithfully
promised to go, go I will. If you will come and sit up with me, well and
good: and I shall be grateful. But if not, I shall certainly go alone."

Then, placing his watch on the table, he waited until half-past eleven;
when taking up the candles, he walked up and down in close proximity to
the entrance of the summer-house, until two o'clock, without either seeing
or hearing anything extraordinary.

Upon this he formed two conclusions; either that the soul perished with
the body, or that the laws of the spiritual world forbade his friend Major
Sydenham abiding by his pledge.

Six weeks afterwards, however, Captain Dyke and his relation the physician
had occasion to go to Eton, where one of the sons of the former was to be
placed at the college. They lodged at the S. Christopher's Inn, occupying
different sleeping-rooms. On the last morning of their stay, Captain Dyke
was unusually late, and when he entered the doctor's room was like a man
struck with madness, his eyes staring, his knees refusing to support him,
and his whole appearance altered.

"What is the matter?" asked Dr. Dyke.

"I have seen the major," replied the captain; "for if ever I saw him in my
life, I certainly saw him just now."

Upon the doctor pressing for details, Captain Dyke gave the following
account:--"After it was first light this morning, someone pulled back the
curtains of my bed suddenly, and I saw the major exactly as I had seen him
in life. 'I could not,' he said, 'come at the time appointed, but I am
here now to tell you that there is a God, a very just and terrible God,
and that if you do not turn over a new leaf you will find it so.' He then
disappeared."

It is said, finally, that Captain Dyke's truthfulness was so notorious, as
to preclude the possibility of doubting his relation of the occurrence.
Furthermore, the apparition and warnings of his departed friend exercised
a visible effect on his character and life, which latter was prolonged for
two years; during which period he is said to have had the words then
spoken to him always sounding in his ears.
