FOOTNOTES:

[1] Here in Mr. Surtees' record is a remarkable example of the pious and
devout use of the sacred Sign of the Cross, which, having been universal
amongst all classes before the Reformation, was continued by many for long
generations afterwards, and the use of which since the Catholic Revival in
the English Church has become common.

[2] "History of Durham," by Robert Surtees, Esq.: under
"Chester-le-Street." Vol. ii. pp. 147-148.

[3] "Nichols' Literary Illustrations." Vol. iv. p. 119, _et seq._ London,
1822.

[4] Arthur Orchard, of S. John's College, Cambridge, B.A. 1662; M.A. 1666;
B.D. 1673.

[5] "Letters on Animal Magnetism," by Dr. W. Gregory, p. 487. London,
1851.

[6] A member of the noble family of Beresford thus wrote (A.D. 1873) to a
friend of the Editor, with reference to the above narrative:--"The
tradition in our family is entirely in favour of the truth of the Spectral
Appearance, and the account which I have read, and return, is in my
opinion a true and faithful narration of it."

[7] The record of this came to the Editor, through a friend, from the late
Rev. W. Hastings Kelke, M.A., sometime Rector of Drayton Beauchamp, in the
county of Bucks.

[8] The barony of Chedworth was conferred upon John Howe, Esq., of
Chedworth, co. Gloucester, on May 12, 1741. He had two sons, John Thynne,
the nobleman referred to in the above account, and Henry Frederick, who in
turn succeeded him in the title. His daughter Mary married Alexander
Wright, Esq., whose daughter Mary Wright is the lady mentioned in the
above narrative. Miss Wright's cousin John inherited as fourth baron, but
died unmarried, Oct. 29, 1804, when the peerage became extinct.

[9] Another narrative of this remarkable event, which substantially
corresponds with those given in the text above is provided here. In
certain respects there are discrepancies, and just those kinds of
discrepancies which might reasonably have been looked for in accounts
drawn up by different hands; but in the main facts, regarding which there
can be no reasonable doubt, there is a remarkable and notable identity in
all the leading features: "Two nights before, on Lord Lyttelton retiring
to bed, after his servant was dismissed and his light extinguished, he had
heard a noise resembling the fluttering of a dove at his chamber window.
This attracted his attention to the spot; when, looking in the direction
of the sound, he saw the figure of an unhappy female whom he had seduced,
and who, when deserted, had put a violent end to her own existence,
standing in the aperture of the window from which the fluttering sound had
proceeded. The form approached the foot of the bed, the room was
preternaturally light, the objects of the chamber were distinctly visible.
Raising her hand and pointing to a dial which stood on the mantlepiece of
the chimney, the figure, with a severe solemnity of voice and manner,
answered to the appalled and conscience-stricken man that at that very
hour, on the third day after the visitation, his life and his sins would
be concluded, and nothing but their punishment remain, if he availed
himself not of the warning to repentance which he had thus received. The
eye of Lord Lyttelton glanced upon the dial; the hand was on the stroke of
twelve: again the apartment was involved in total darkness--the warning
spirit disappeared, and bore away at her departure all the lightness of
heart and buoyancy of spirit, ready flow of wit, and vivacity of manner,
which had formerly been the pride and ornament of the unhappy being to
whom she had delivered her tremendous summons. Such was the tale that Lord
Lyttelton delivered to his companions. They laughed at his superstition,
and endeavoured to convince him that his mind must have been impressed
with this idea by some dream of a more consistent nature than dreams
generally are, and that he had mistaken the visions of his sleep for the
visitation of a spirit. He was consoled, but not convinced; he felt
relieved by their distrust, and on the second night after the appearance
of the spectre, he retreated to his apartment with his faith in the
reality of the transaction somewhat shaken; and his spirits, though not
revived, certainly lightened of somewhat of their oppression. On the
succeeding day the guests of Lord Lyttelton, with the connivance of his
attendant, had provided that the clocks throughout the house should be
advanced an hour; by occupying the host's attention during the whole day
with different and successive objects of amusement, they contributed to
prevent his discovering the imposture. Ten o'clock struck: the nobleman
was silent and depressed. Eleven struck, the depression deepened, and now
not even a smile, or the slightest movement of his eye indicated him to be
conscious of the efforts of his associates, as they attempted to dispel
his gloom. Twelve struck. 'Thank God! I am safe,' exclaimed Lord
Lyttelton, 'the ghost was a liar after all. Some wine, there. Congratulate
me, my friends; congratulate me on my reprieve. Why, what a fool I was to
be cast down by so idle and absurd a circumstance! But, however, it is
time for bed. We'll be up early and out with the hounds to-morrow. By my
faith, it's half-past twelve, so good night!' and he returned to his
chamber convinced of his security, and believing that the threatened hour
of peril was now past. His guests remained together to await the
completion of the time so ominously designated by the vision. A quarter of
an hour had elapsed: they heard the valet descend from his master's room.
It was just twelve. Lord Lyttelton's bell rang violently. The company ran
in a body to his apartment. The clock struck one at their entrance, the
unhappy nobleman lay extended on the bed before them, pale and lifeless,
and his countenance terribly convulsed."

In his "Memoirs," Sir Nathaniel Wraxall has the following relating to this
occurrence:--

"Dining at Pitt Place, about four years after the death of Lord Lyttelton,
in the year 1783, I had the curiosity to visit the bed-chamber, where the
casement window, at which Lord Lyttelton asserted the dove appeared to
flutter, was pointed out to me; and at his stepmother's, the Dowager Lady
Lyttelton's in Portugal Street, Grosvenor Square, who being a woman of
very lively imagination, lent an implicit faith to all the supernatural
facts which were supposed to have accompanied or produced Lord Lyttelton's
end. I have frequently seen a painting which she herself executed in 1780,
especially to commemorate the event: it hung in a conspicuous part of her
drawing-room. There the dove appears at the window, while a female figure,
habited in white, stands at the foot of the bed, announcing to Lord
Lyttelton his dissolution. Every part of the picture was faithfully
designed after the description given to her by the valet-de-chambre who
attended him, to whom his master related all the circumstances."

[10] Copied from a paper in the autograph of Lord Westcote, entitled
"Remarkable Circumstances attending the Death of Thomas, Lord Lyttelton,"
which the present Lord Lyttelton most courteously entrusted to the Editor
of this volume, together with several other original documents relating to
the same, as follows:--1. Extract from Mr. Plumer Ward's "Illustrations of
Human Life," vol. i. p. 165. 2. Written account given by Sir Digby Neave,
bart., to Lord Lyttelton in 1860. 3. MS. containing Mr. George Fortescue's
testimony, signed S. L. 4. The following declaration:--"Chiswick, May 6th,
1867. Miles Peter Andrews told me the story of Lord Lyttelton's appearance
to him, driving with me at Wingerworth, many years ago.--Anna Hunloke."

[11] Lord Lyttelton's valet made the following statement:--"That Lord
Lyttelton made his usual preparations for bed; that he kept every now and
then looking for his watch; that when he got into bed, he ordered his
curtains to be closed at the foot. It was now within a minute or two of
twelve by his watch; he asked to look at mine, and seemed pleased to find
it nearly keep time with his own. His lordship then put them both to his
ear, to satisfy himself if they went. When it was more than a quarter
after twelve by our watches, he said, 'This mysterious lady is not a true
prophetess, I find.' When it was near the real hour of twelve, he said,
'Come, I'll wait no longer; get me my medicine, I'll take it, and try to
sleep.' I just stepped into the dressing-room to prepare the physic, and
had mixed it, when I thought I heard my lord breathing very hard. I ran to
him, and found him in the agonies of death."--"Gentleman's Magazine," vol.
lxxxv. part i. p. 598, A.D. 1815.

[12] In Boswell's "Life of Samuel Johnson" (vol. iv. p. 313) the Doctor is
recorded to have said, "It is the most extraordinary occurrence in my
days. I heard it from Lord Westcote, his uncle. I am so glad to have
evidence of the spiritual world, that I am willing to believe it."

[13] "James Weld, Esq., seventh son of Thomas Weld, Esq., of Lulworth
Castle, was born April 30, 1785, married July 15, 1812, the Hon. Juliana
Anne, daughter of Robert Edward, tenth Lord Petre, and has had issue, 1.
Henry, 2. Francis, a priest, 3. _Philip_, died 1846; 1. Anna Maria, 2.
Katharine, 3. Agnes, a nun, 4. Charlotte."--See Burke's "Landed Gentry,"
vol. ii. art. "Weld of Lulworth Castle."

[14] The Right Rev. Monsignor Patterson, the present President of S.
Edmund's college (A.D. 1872), kindly informs me that there is a memorial
brass in front of the sanctuary of the chapel of that society, on which is
figured a floriated cross, rising out of waves, with a label appended to
it,--"Lord save me."

[15] S. Stanislaus Kostka was born on Oct. 28, 1550, his parents being
John and Margaret Kostka, Polish nobles of wealth and repute. Miraculous
signs foreshadowed his birth; and the holiness and purity of his early
years betokened in a marked manner the favour of God towards this child.
In his fourteenth year he went to Vienna to finish his studies at the
Jesuit college. Here, his saintliness was so manifested forth by his
conduct, that the Fathers said, "We have in our seminary an angel under
the form of Stanislaus." Many miraculous favours are said to have been
bestowed upon him by the hands of saints and angels, too numerous and
lengthy to be recorded. He commenced his noviciate in the Jesuit college
at Rome; where, after a short but edifying sojourn, he joyfully departed
this life, aged 18 years, on the morning of August 15, 1568.

[16] Mr. de Lisle, of Garendon Park, Leicestershire, in communicating to
me the above narrative, writes as follows:--"I send you my account of the
apparition of Philip Weld, according to my promise. I received it back
this morning (July 17, 1872) from the Benedictine Convent at Athenstone,
in Warwickshire, where my daughter Gwendoline is a nun, and where one of
the Miss Welds, a cousin of Philip, is also a nun. She approves the
accuracy of my account, and has added a paper with a few notes, which I
inclose along with my own article, and from which you can correct mine so
far as needed. I add here my affirmation that the above recorded narrative
is a true and faithful account of what the Very Rev. Dr. Cox, then
President of S. Edmund's College, related to me and to Mrs. de Lisle in
February, 1847." The Editor is also greatly indebted to the Very Rev.
Alfred Weld, S.J., for his courteous Letters upon the subject of the above
narrative, as likewise to the Rev. E. J. Purbrick, S.J.

[17] "Letters on Animal Magnetism," by Dr. W. Gregory, pp. 448-489.
London, 1851.

[18] "The Apparition or Spectral Appearance of my friend's father to him
in the West Indies--the old gentleman having died in England, and the fact
of two officers having seen it simultaneously, shows that it could not
have been the result of their imagination, but that it was an objective
appearance; in fact, the dead man's immortal spirit, indicating to one
once bound by Nature's ties to the living witness of it, that the
separation of soul and body had taken place. It is firmly believed by the
family, who, however, all shrink from making their names public. So, my
dear doctor, you must be content with this."--E. M. C., Cambridge, July
15, 1873.

[19] "The narrative of the spectral appearance of a lady at Torquay,
forwarded to Dr. F. G. Lee at his special request, is copied from, and
compared with that in, the family Bible of H. A. T. Baillie-Hamilton by
the undersigned,

  "C. Margaret Balfour,
   Mary Baillie-Hamilton.
   Witness, J. R. Grant.

  "Princes Street, Edinburgh,
   October 7, 1871."

[20] "The above is a correct and truthful statement.

  "Witness my hand and seal.
   John Gill Godwin.

[Illustration]

  "76, Warwick Street,
   South Belgravia, Nov. 6, 1874."

[21] Special enquiry, made since the above was penned, shows conclusively
that this appearance was seen exactly seven years after the date of
death.--Editor.

[22] The Editor is in no degree concerned with Paganism or Pagan
superstitions, nor has he gathered præ-Christian examples. Yet such will
have been numerous to the ordinary student of classical history. The
Haunted House of Damon, mentioned by Plutarch, will be familiar to many.

[23] The following is the original of a most beautiful verse in Bishop
Ken's well-known "Evening Hymn," either mutilated in the worst of taste in
most hymn-books, or else altogether eliminated and suppressed:--

  "You, my best guardian, while I sleep
   Close to my bed your vigils keep;
   Your love angelical instil,
   Stop all the avenues of ill."

[24] "What do we know of the World of Spirits? Little or nothing, beyond
what Faith and Revelation afford. Still we know that they surround us;
that they hover over us; that they accompany us whithersoever we go; and
that even in the innermost tabernacle of the soul they penetrate and have
their being. Good spirits and bad are around us; good spirits to aid us,
to waft our lame and imperfect prayers to heaven, and to protect us in the
hour of temptation or peril. 'He shall give His angels charge over thee,
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.' Bad angels, too, are around us
and against us, percolating through every avenue of the soul, inflaming
the imagination, warping the judgment, tainting the will, and too often,
alas! perverting it to perdition. Bad angels are around us, even within
the protecting sanctuary of God's Church, when summoned, permitted there
by the subdued and corrupted will of man. Bad angels are around us in
every walk and rank and condition and event of life: we see them not, but
they hover over us and around us, and they penetrate within the mysterious
precincts of the soul, by many a foul and unholy thought, by many an evil
suggestion to sin. And they triumph, and they gibber in their unholy glee
whenever they tempt and prevail. They triumph, and they laugh the
insulting laugh whenever they steep to the lips in sin an unhappy mortal,
and fasten upon him the mocking thought and determination of a deathbed
repentance. That is their battle ground, the battle ground of victory. The
standard of deceit is then triumphant: the captive is delivered bound into
their hands to do with as they list, to be tormented according to the
refinement of their infernal pleasure. 'He shall be delivered unto the
tormentors.'"--Rev. Edward Price.

[25] This belief prevails extensively in Sweden, Germany, and Switzerland.

[26] The souls of the dead, or spirits of some sort, are constantly heard
and not unfrequently seen in mines. A Shropshire miner informed the Editor
that, of his own knowledge, he had heard supernatural sounds of moanings
and mutterings underground, and had seemed to _feel_ the passing spirits
as they swept by. On one occasion, after the violent and sudden death of a
comrade, the noises were unusually loud; while the horses employed
underground would stand trembling and covered with perspiration whenever
the spirits were heard.

[27] "The Life of the Rev. John Wesley, M.A., by Robert Southey, Esq.,"
vol. ii. p. 370. London: 1858.

[28] In many places on the continent, especially in France and Spain, it
was the custom to pray for departed souls, suffering (as their needful
purification was incompleted) _in any particular locality_. Dr. Neale
gives an example of this, occurring in a prayer which he saw printed and
hung up in a church at Braganza in Spain, which ran thus:--"We pray,
likewise, for the souls which are suffering in any place by the particular
chastisement of God." And the following is translated from a French
Prayer-Book of the last century:--"Have mercy, O Lord God, good and
pitiful, on the souls of those who are being chastised for their
transgressions in the flesh, in those places where Thou willest them to
suffer;" an evident reference in both cases to troubled spirits which
haunt definite spots.

[29] When the tone of thought in Shakspeare's day is compared with that in
our own, the contrast between the accurate and explicit religious
statements regarding the Supernatural, with the shallow and cynical
scepticism of modern writers, can hardly be put down to the credit of the
Modern. At all events those who claim to range themselves on the side of
the Ancient and the True may be permitted to do so. Nothing could more
forcibly set forth the current belief of the sixteenth century than the
following well-known utterance of the Ghost in "Hamlet":--

                  "I am thy Father's spirit;
  Doom'd for a certain time to walk the night,
  And for the day confined to fast in fires,
  Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
  Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
  To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
  I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
  Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
  Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
  Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
  And each particular hair to stand on end,
  Like quills upon the fretful porcupine:
  But this eternal blazon must not be
  To ears of flesh and blood."
                          "Hamlet," pp. 22-23. Oxford: 1873.

[30] The Editor is indebted to the late Revs. W. Hastings Kelke and H.
Roundell of Buckingham, for the above curious example. It was intended to
have been published some years ago in "The Records of Bucks."

[31] For an accurate account by the late Rev. W. Hastings Kelke of this
curious and interesting old mansion, the property of Lord Clifford of
Chudleigh, see "The Records of Bucks," vol. i. pp. 255-267. Aylesbury,
1858.

[32] "Memoirs of Sir John Reresby," p. 238.

[33] The Rev. Joseph Jefferson, M.A., Vicar of North Stainley, near Ripon,
who sent me the above--unaltered, and printed just as it was written--on
the 2nd of June, 1873.

[34] "Notes and Queries," vol. x. second series, Sept. 8, 1860, pp.
192-193, and Sept. 22, 1860, p. 236.

[35] Barby is a parish in the Hundred of Fawsley, in the county of
Northampton, a little more than five miles from Daventry. It contains
between six and seven hundred inhabitants.

[36] "Your account, as about to be printed, is _true and exact_, as to all
the facts of the haunted house at ----, which came within my own personal
knowledge. Don't mention names, or we shall perhaps be damaging the
property, and lay ourselves open to an action at law. I may add that the
late Bishop of Chester [Dr. Graham] is said to have furnished a mutual
friend, the late Master of Trinity, with similar accounts, which had taken
place before I knew the place, verifying to an A B C the old and, no
doubt, perfectly true tradition. It is strange enough I know, _but it is
true_.--Yours, &c., H. S. B., November, 1874."

[37] The wife of the clergyman above alluded to, wrote to the Editor as
follows:--"Having read the account which you contemplate publishing, I can
testify of my own personal knowledge that it is _neither understated nor
exaggerated, but is in all its details strictly true and accurate_.--June,
1874."

[38] Miss S. F. Caulfeild, author of "Avenele," "Desmond," &c.

[39] It seems that other places are reported to be haunted by appearances
of Birds. A correspondent informs the Editor that this is the case with an
old House in Dorsetshire, not far from Poole, where a wingless bird is
sometimes seen. The same is said of a mansion in Essex, as another
correspondent declares. In one room in an old house in Dean Street, Soho,
likewise, several persons have seen a large raven, three times the size of
an ordinary raven, perched on the tester of the old-fashioned bed. The
inmates of the house, in 1854, whose family had had the lease for eighty
years, are said to have been so accustomed to seeing it (though they knew
it to be spectral) that they were undisturbed by its frequent appearance.
Dr. Neale's story as follows (not unlike the examples already given), is
very singular. Regarding it he wrote:--"_It comes to me with a weight of
evidence, which, strange as is the tale, I cannot disbelieve_. Three
friends, not very much distinguished by piety, had been dining together at
the residence of one of them in Norfolk. After dinner they went out and
strolled through the churchyard. 'Well,' said a clergyman, one of the
three, 'I wonder, after all, if there is any future state or not?' They
agreed that whichever died first should appear to the others and inform
them. 'In what shape shall it be?' asked one of the friends. At that
moment a flight of crows arose from a neighbouring field. 'A crow is as
good a shape as any other,' said the clergyman; 'if I should be the first
to die, I will appear in that.' He _did_ die first; and some time after
his death, the other two had been dining together, and were walking in the
garden afterwards. A crow settled on the head of one of them, stuck there
pertinaciously, and could only be torn off by main force. And when this
gentleman's carriage came to take him home, the crow perched on it, and
accompanied him back."

[40] "Strange Things Amongst Us." By Henry Spicer. 2nd ed., pp. 100-102.
London: Chapman & Hall, 1864.

[41] The following is taken from a small volume which has been
gratuitously circulated very widely amongst the clergy and laity. It bears
a Christian title, but is altogether anti-Christian from end to end:--

"The unwise, idolatrous, early Christian priests, in their admiration of
Christ, exalted him in their imagination to be God Himself, forgetting the
Creator God, and exalting in their foolish imagination his Blessed Mother
as the Mother of God--folly that has been widely perpetuated down to these
days. Oh, foolish churches, how great has been your folly, how widely you
have departed from the truth; therefore how little you have been able to
cope with the wicked heart of man!

"In like manner as the Israelites, from the crucifixion down to these
days, have erred in disbelieving the Messiah-ship of Christ, so the
spurious churches have, during many ages, exalted Christ in their
imagination to be God. The Israelites and the spurious churches being
equal in their great error--the one refusing to acknowledge him as the
long-promised Messiah, the other exalting him in their imagination as
being the Messiah, the Holy Ghost, and God the Creator also; the
Israelites refusing to give any glory to Christ, the spurious churches
madly rushing, in their ancient antagonism towards the Jews, to the
opposite extreme, by robbing, in their imagination, God the Creator of His
Glory, and giving all glory to the Messiah, to the great grief of the
Messiah.

"Now clearly understand, oh ye nations of the whole world! it was not God
who was born out of the Virgin Mary, and who was crucified, but the before
holy angel Christ--understand this, and the Holy Scriptures will be plain
to your comprehension--Christians have erred greatly during so many
generations, in like manner as the followers of Mahomet and of Buddah have
erred--errors that were carelessly accepted by powerful rulers, evil and
ignorant, and forced upon the priests and the people, generation after
generation. The time is at hand, even knocking at the door, when your
understanding shall be made clear, and neither the professing followers of
Christ, nor of Buddah, nor of Mahomet, nor the unwise of other sects, will
continue in their many errors."--"Christ is Coming," pp. 135-6.

"Yet to-day, if one dare question the value of Christianity, what a howl
is raised from one end of Christendom to the other! We say so advisedly,
for it is the howl of fear.... Though Christianity to-day declines and is
losing power and vigour, yet in its day it hath done great and glorious
good in the work of human redemption. It was an advance upon the religions
which preceded it."--"What of the Dead? An Address by Mr. J. J. Morse, in
the Trance State," p. 5. London: J. Burns. 1873.

[42] 2 St. Peter iii. 3, 4.

[43] "A Scientific View of Modern Spiritualism: a Paper read by Mr. T.
Grant to the Maidstone and Mid-Kent Natural History and Philosophical
Society on Tuesday, Dec. 31, 1872." London: J. Burns.

[44] A remarkable example of this has been courteously given to me by Mr.
Thomas Bosworth, of 198, High Holborn, as follows:--"Some seven or eight
years ago there appeared in one of the newspapers a story to the following
effect:--A commercial firm at Bolton, in Lancashire, had found that a
considerable sum of money which had been sent to their bank by a
confidential clerk, had not been placed to their credit. The clerk
remembered the fact of taking the money, though not the particulars, but
at the bank nothing was known of it. The clerk, feeling that he was liable
to suspicion in the matter, and anxious to elucidate it, sought the help
of spirit medium. The medium promised to do her best. Having heard the
story, she presently passed into a kind of trance. Shortly after she said,
'I see you on your way to the bank--I see you go into the bank--I see you
go to such and such part of the bank--I see you hand some papers to a
clerk--I see him put them in such and such a place under some other
papers--and I see them there now.' The clerk went to the bank, directed
the cashier where to look for the money, and it was found; the cashier
afterwards remembering that in the hurry of business he had there
deposited it. A relation of mine saw this story in a newspaper at the
time, and wrote to the firm in question, the name of which was given,
asking whether the facts were as stated. He was told in reply that they
were. That gentleman who was applied to, having corrected one or two
unimportant details in the above narration, wrote on November 9,
1874:--'Your account is a correct one. I have the answer of the firm to my
enquiry at home now.'"

[45] The term "willer" and "necromancer" are used as identical by Easterns
as well as by the aborigines of New Zealand.

[46] There have been published "Rules to be Observed for the Spirit
Circle," "framed under the Direction and Impression of Spirits," by Emma
Hardinge, from which the following points are gathered. Firstly, there is
a definition, and it is stated that "the Spirit Circle is the assembling
together of a given number of persons for the purpose of seeking communion
with the spirits who have passed away from Earth into the higher world of
souls." A leading direction enjoins the inquiring votaries to "_Avoid
strong_ light, which by producing excessive motion in the atmosphere,
disturbs the manifestations. A very subdued light is the most favourable
for any manifestations of a magnetic character, especially for spiritual
magnetism." "Strongly positive persons of any kind" and "the dogmatical"
should not be admitted. Furthermore, these "Rules" contain the
following:--

"Spirit control is often deficient, and at first almost always imperfect.
_By often yielding to it, your organism becomes more flexible and the
spirit more experienced_; and practice in control is absolutely necessary
for spirits as well as mortals. _If dark and evil-disposed spirits
manifest to you, never drive them away_, but always strive to elevate them
and treat them as you would mortals under similar circumstances. Do not
always attribute falsehoods to 'lying spirits,' or deceiving mediums. Many
mistakes occur in the communion of which you cannot always be aware.
_Strive for Truth_, but rebuke Error gently, and do not always attribute
it to design, but rather to mistake, in so difficult and experimental a
stage of the communion as mortals at present enjoy with spirits."

[47] The kind of communication made to those who first consult the
spirits, is just of that nature calculated to allure the superficial, the
frivolous, the uninformed, triflers, and seekers after novelties; and to
lead them on to a more frequent intercourse and a deeper kind of
communion.

[48] Dr. J. G. Davey, M.D., of Northwoods, Bristol, writes as follows:--"I
have satisfied myself not only of the mere abstract truth of Spiritualism,
but of its great and marvellous power for good, both on moral and
religious grounds. The direct and positive communications vouchsafed to me
from very many near and dear relatives and friends, said to be dead, have
been of the most pleasing yet startling character."--_Report on
Spiritualism_, p. 232. London: Longmans, 1871.

[49] This person, whose name was most accurately given, had died five days
previously. He was a servant on the estate, and had belonged to the sect
of the Anabaptists.

[50] "Notes of an Enquiry into the Phenomena called Spiritualism, during
the years 1870-73." By William Crookes, F.R.S.

[51] "The reader who has not been in the habit of attending _séances_
should be informed that the peculiar phraseology of some of the questions
is rendered necessary by the fact that if you ask the spirits, 'Where did
_you_ die?' or 'Where were _you_ buried?' they will sometimes tell you
that it was not _they_ who died and were buried, but merely the external
shell or material covering of the real man."--Note by the Editor of the
"Spiritual Magazine."

[52] "There is scarcely a city or a considerable town in Continental
Europe, at the present moment, where Spiritualists are not reckoned by
hundreds if not by thousands; where regularly established communities do
not habitually meet for spiritual purposes: and they reckon among them
individuals of every class and avocation."--"Scepticism and Spiritualism."
In a letter to the "Spiritual Magazine," dated May 4th, 1867, Judge
Edmunds, of America, estimated the number of Spiritualists in the United
States at ten millions. "In London, ten years ago," writes Mr. R. Dale
Owen, "there was but a single Spiritual paper; to-day there are
five."--"The Debatable Land," p. 175. London: Trübner, 1871.

[53] The Rev. John Edwards, jun., M.A., Vicar of Prestbury, near
Cheltenham.

[54] "We do not, either by faith or works, _earn_ Heaven, nor are we
sentenced, on any Day of Wrath, to Hell. In the next world we simply
gravitate to the position for which, by life on earth, we have fitted
ourselves; and we occupy that position _because_ we are fitted for
it."--"The Debatable Land," by R. Dale Owen, p. 125. London, 1871.

[55] Howitt's "What Spiritualism has Taught," p. 8.

[56] Howitt's "What Spiritualism has Taught," p. 10.

[57] "Spiritualism is avowedly opposed to the Christian Religion. 'The
Creed of the spirits' is published in the shape of a little tract, one of
those called 'Seed Corn,' which active agents love to distribute
gratuitously wherever readers can be found, and these are its clauses: 'I
believe in God'--'I believe in the immortality of the human soul'--'I
believe in right and wrong'--'I believe in the communion of spirits as
ministering angels.' Nothing more. Those well-intending persons,
therefore--and we believe that among Protestants there are many--who go to
_séances_ out of curiosity, and who are sometimes heard to say that if
Spiritualism be true it must therefore be right, should be warned that
they are lending countenance to persons in whose writings the doctrines of
the Trinity and the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ are emphatically
denied--the Holy Ghost scoffed at in words too blasphemous for repetition,
our Blessed Lady insulted, and the whole fabric of Religion attacked and
undermined; and whether this is done by spirits who actually manifest
themselves for the purpose of leading people astray, or by impostors who
work upon the credulity of their audience, the thing can have but one
origin, and that is the same as that of any other work by which the
Arch-enemy seeks to close the heart of man against the True Faith. It is
time therefore to use other weapons than that of ridicule against the
baneful and, we fear, widely increasing delusion."--"Tablet," September 6,
1873.

[58] Collect for the Feast of S. Michael and All Angels, "Book of Common
Prayer."

[59] "The soul has a kind of body of a quality of its own."--Tertull.
cont. Marc. lib. v. cap. xv.

[60] This account is current, with slender and unimportant variations, at
Oxford; or at all events _was_ current in my days there (A.D. 1850-1854),
and on what could not be regarded as other than good authority. One
version is already in print--that given by Mr. William Maskell, at pp.
108-112 of his curious and interesting book, "Odds and Ends," London,
1872. He seems to imply that it was the late Archdeacon of Cleveland, the
Ven. Edward Churton, who saw the spectral apparitions in Brasenose Lane;
but the Archdeacon belonged to Christ Church, and, as his son, the Rev. W.
R. Churton, of Cambridge, informs me, was not resident at Oxford at the
time of the occurrence. More probably it was the Archdeacon's brother, the
Rev. T. T. Churton, sometime Fellow of Brasenose.

[61] As to the universality of the belief in Witchcraft, the reader may
consult Herder's "Philosophy of History," bk. viii. ch. 2. And as regards
the convictions of some of the leading minds of Europe in times past on
the subject, Mr. Leckey in his "History of Rationalism" (vol. i. p. 66),
makes the following candid admission: "It is, I think, impossible to deny
that the books in defence of the belief are not only far more numerous
than the later works against it, but that they also represent far more
learning, dialectic skill, and even general ability. For many centuries
the ablest men were not merely unwilling to repudiate the superstition;
they often pressed forward earnestly and with the most intense conviction
to defend it. Indeed, during the period when Witchcraft was most prevalent
there were few writers of real eminence who did not, on some occasion,
take especial pains to throw the weight of their authority into the scale.
Thomas Aquinas was probably the ablest writer of the thirteenth century,
and he assures us that diseases and tempests are often the direct acts of
the devil; that the devil can transport men at his pleasure through the
air; and that he can transform them into any shape. Gerson, the Chancellor
of the University of Paris, and, as many think, the author of 'The
Imitation,' is justly regarded as one of the master intellects of his age;
and he, too, wrote in defence of the belief. Bodin was unquestionably the
most original political philosopher who had arisen since Machiavelli, and
he devoted all his learning and acuteness to crushing the rising
scepticism 'on the subject of witches.'"

[62] 1 S. Peter v. 8.

[63] Acts xvi. 16-18.

[64] Apologia, cap. v. De Civit. Dei, lib. xv. cap. xxiii.

[65] 1 Cor. xi. 10.

[66] Ibid. xi. 15.

[67] Luther, following the current tradition of his day, believed that the
Devil could beget children on the bodies of women; and declared that he
himself had personally come across, and was well acquainted with, one of
the Devil's offspring. So too did Erasmus believe the fact of such
generation. It is a tradition in the Catholic Church, that the last and
great Antichrist--the final Antichrist--may be born of such an alliance.
Of course Mahomet was _a_ great Antichrist; for though he borrowed certain
Christian features and adopted many Jewish notions and Rabbinical
traditions in his system, yet he plainly and undoubtedly fulfilled the
prophetic statement of S. John the Divine--"_He is Antichrist, who denieth
the Father and the Son_." (1 S. John ii. 22.) Mahomet's great and leading
heresy is expressed in the following dogmatic assertion of the Koran:
"_God neither begetteth nor is begotten_." Now no system has more
pertinaciously, successfully, and for so long a time opposed Christianity
than Mahometanism--not even Arianism. But modern "Liberalism," so called,
as still developing amongst ancient Christian nations, promises even to
outstrip the system of Mahomet, and to be as blighting and baneful in its
results.

[68] "An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians." By
E. W. Lane. 5th edition. London: 1860.

[69] See the whole of this chapter, which is full of information and
interest. It gives a record of several other similar examples.

[70] In No. 117 of the "Quarterly Review," there is a criticism on Mr.
Lane's account of these necromancers; but the facts recorded by him are
neither satisfactorily accounted for nor successfully explained away.

[71] My brother-in-law, Captain Ostrehan, of the Bombay Staff Corps, Sir
Alfred Slade, Bart., and the Rev. Dr. Dunbar, chaplain to Bishop
Claughton, have furnished me with remarkable examples of the power of
Oriental necromancers.

[72] Nevins' "China and the Chinese," p. 167. New York, 1868.

[73] "Theory of Pneumatology," by J. H. Jung-Stilling, pp. 136-137.
London: Longmans, 1834.

[74] Dr. Sexton in his "Defence of Modern Spiritualism" (London: J.
Burns), a tractate written with ability and frankness, remarks that "it is
too late in the day to sneer at this matter with a sort of
self-complacency, which seems to say, 'You are a poor deluded creature:
behold my superior wisdom; I don't believe in such nonsense.' Here are the
facts, and we demand in the true spirit of Science to know what is to be
done with them. If you have any theory by which they can be explained, let
us hear it, in order that we may judge of its merits; if you have not, we
are all the more justified in clinging to our own." And, again, referring
to the inquiries of a certain Dr. Hare in America, he writes:--"The
question with Dr. Hare was--Did the phenomena occur, and, if so, were they
produced by the direct action of those persons in whose presence they took
place? The nonsensical notions mooted by unscientific opponents, and which
are still urged with as much gravity as though they had been made the
subject of mathematical demonstration, that electricity, magnetism, odic,
or psychic forces are the agents by which the manifestations are produced,
he knew well enough could not bear a moment's investigation. Electricity
cannot move tables, nor in fact act at all without cumbrous apparatus.
Magnetism cannot give intelligent responses to questions, and odic force
and its twin brother psychic are probably as imaginary as the
philosopher's stone; and even if their existence could be proved beyond
the shadow of a doubt, they could not in the slightest degree help us to
the solution of the great problem of the cause of the phenomena designated
Spiritual."

[75] A thoughtful writer, and one who is evidently far-seeing and awake to
the danger, recently made the following pertinent remarks in the _Church
Review_:--

"The presence of Superstition is always the sign of a wandering from the
true path; the _excess_ of Superstition almost invariably the precursor of
great intellectual and religious changes, if not absolute convulsions.
Before the great crash of Paganism the necromancers and practisers of
curious arts were carrying on an unusually brisk trade among the Romans.
We all know how prevalent was the belief in witches, wizards, and
astrology at the time immediately preceding the (so-called) Reformation.
Before the French Revolution the sect founded by Cagliostro and Lorenza
Feliciani, which professed a knowledge of the ancient arts of the
Egyptians, found great numbers of followers. And have we not a sign of a
national mental crisis in our own day in the prevalence of 'Spiritualism,'
which is the form which necromancy at present takes? There may be many
people who are utterly unaware how large a number of their
fellow-countrymen, and especially of their countrywomen, believe in
Spiritualism, and attend _séances_. Those who do so are not usually very
fond of parading their belief, because they have a lurking suspicion that
they may get laughed at; but this very reserve makes the bond between the
votaries of Spiritualism so much the stronger. It is no exaggeration to
say that the practice of dealing with familiar spirits is on the increase
in Great Britain at the present moment." (A.D. 1873.)

[76] "On the Invisible World," by Joseph Hall, D.D., &c., book i. sec. 8.
Father Christopher Davenport, better known as "Sancta Clara," in one of
his most remarkable treatises, "Paralipomena Philosophica de Mundo
Peripatetico," chap. iv. p. 68 (A.D. 1652), confirms the account in the
text of the above-named Bishop of Exeter, giving all the details of this
particular miraculous cure. It seems that both the Well and Chapel of S.
Madron were constantly visited by the faithful during the first part of
the seventeenth century, especially in the month of May and on the feast
of Corpus Christi.

[77] "History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism in
Europe," by W. E. H. Lecky, M.A. Fourth edition in two volumes. London,
1870.

[78] Dr. Newman will, of course, be excepted; for his remarkable
Dissertation prefixed to the translation of Fleury's "History" is known to
many, more especially in its new form,--a volume already referred to at
length in chap. ii. pp. 35-36. It is certainly quite unjust to include the
Tractarian school amongst those who are referred to by Mr. Lecky in the
following passage:--"At present nearly all educated men receive an account
of a miracle taking place in their own day, with an absolute and even
derisive incredulity which dispenses with all examination of the
evidence."--Vol. i. p. 1. Though many are reticent, and many more shrink
from publicity and rude criticism, it is known that the direct influence
of the Miraculous and Supernatural is by no means unknown in the Church of
England.

[79] Job xxv. 5.

[80] See a most remarkable Letter from the pen of my friend the Rev. R. S.
Hawker, of Morwenstow, on "The Claims of Science and Faith," standing as
an Appendix to this Chapter, in which the office of the angels is referred
to.

[81] Mr. Mill, who is now dead, wrote that "this World was a bungled
business in which no clear-sighted man [meaning himself apparently, and
modestly] could see any signs either of wisdom or of God." Mr. Matthew
Arnold, son of Dr. Arnold of Rugby, has written that "the existence of God
is an unverifiable hypothesis." A third writer maintains that the "great
duty" of the philosophers "should be to eliminate the idea of God from the
minds of men," a sentiment not unlike that of Mr. Congreve, already quoted
on p. 19 of vol. i.; while a popular publication, circulated by thousands
amongst the lower classes, declares that the mission of its Editors is "to
teach men to live without the fear of God; to die without the fear of the
Devil; and to attain salvation without the Blood of the Lamb."







