(III.) John Cope Sherbroke and George Wynyard appear in the "Army List" of
1785, the one as a captain and the other lieutenant in the 33rd
Regiment,--a corps which some years after had the honour to be commanded
by the Hon. Arthur Wellesley, subsequently Duke of Wellington. The
regiment was then on service in Canada, and Sherbroke and Wynyard, being
of congenial tastes, had become great friends. It was their custom to
spend in study much of the time which their brother officers devoted to
idle pleasures. According to a narration[7] resting on the best authority
now attainable, they were one afternoon sitting in Wynyard's apartment.
It was perfectly light, the hour was about four o'clock: they had dined,
but neither of them had drunk wine, and they had retired from their mess
to continue together the occupations of the morning. It ought to have been
said that the apartment in which they were had two doors in it, the one
opening into a passage and the other leading into Wynyard's bedroom. There
was no other means of entering the sitting-room, so that any person
passing into the bedroom must have remained there unless he returned by
the way he entered. This point is of consequence to the story.

"As these two young officers were pursuing their studies, Sherbroke, whose
eyes happened accidentally to glance from the book before him towards the
door which opened to the passage, all at once observed a tall youth of
about twenty years of age whose appearance was that of extreme emaciation.
Struck with the presence of a perfect stranger, he immediately turned to
his friend, who was sitting near him, and directed his attention to the
guest who had thus strangely broken in upon their studies. As soon as
Wynyard's eyes were turned towards the mysterious visitor his countenance
became suddenly agitated. 'I have heard,' says Sir John Sherbroke, 'of a
man's being as pale as death, but I never saw a living face assume the
appearance of a corpse except Wynyard's at that moment.' As they looked
silently at the form before them--for Wynyard, who seemed to apprehend
the import of the appearance, was deprived of the faculty of speech, and
Sherbroke, perceiving the agitation of his friend, felt no inclination to
address it--as they looked silently upon the figure it proceeded slowly
into the adjoining apartment, and in the act of passing them cast its eyes
with an expression of somewhat melancholy affection on young Wynyard. The
oppression of this extraordinary presence was no sooner removed than
Wynyard, seizing his friend by the arm, and drawing a deep breath as if
recovering from the suffocation of intense astonishment and emotion,
muttered in a low and almost inaudible tone of voice, 'Great God, my
brother!' 'Your brother!' repeated Sherbroke, 'what can you mean? Wynyard,
there must be some deception; follow me;' and immediately taking his
friend by the arm, he preceded him into the bedroom, which, as before
stated, was connected with the sitting-room, and into which the strange
visitor had evidently entered. It has already been said that from this
chamber there was no possibility of withdrawing but by the way of the
apartment, through which the figure had certainly never returned. Imagine
then the astonishment of the young officers when, on finding themselves in
the chamber, they perceived that the room was perfectly untenanted.
Wynyard's mind had received an impression at the first moment of his
observing him, that the figure whom he had seen was the spirit of his
brother. Sherbroke still persevered in strenuously believing that some
delusion had been practised. They took note of the day and hour in which
the event had happened, but they resolved not to mention the occurrence in
the regiment, and gradually they persuaded each other that they had been
imposed upon by some artifice of their fellow-officers, though they could
neither account for the means of its execution. They were content to
imagine anything possible rather than admit the possibility of a
supernatural appearance. But though they had attempted these stratagems of
self-delusion, Wynyard could not help expressing his solicitude with
respect to the safety of the brother whose apparition he had either seen
or imagined himself to have seen; and the anxiety which he exhibited for
letters from England, and his frequent mention of his brother's health, at
length awakened the curiosity of his comrades, and eventually betrayed him
into a declaration of the circumstances which he had in vain determined to
conceal. The story of the silent and unbidden visitor was no sooner
bruited abroad than the arrival of Wynyard's letters from England were
welcomed with more than usual eagerness, for they promised to afford the
clue to the mystery which had happened among themselves.

"By the first ships no intelligence relating to the story could have been
received, for they had all departed from England previously to the
appearance of the spirit. At length, the long wished-for vessel arrived;
all the officers had letters except Wynyard. They examined the several
newspapers, but they contained no mention of any death or of any other
circumstance connected with his family that could account for the
preternatural event. There was a solitary letter for Sherbroke still
unopened. The officers had received their letters in the mess-room at the
hour of supper. After Sherbroke had broken the seal of his last packet,
and cast a glance on its contents, he beckoned his friend away from the
company, and departed from the room. All were silent. The suspense of the
interest was now at its climax; the impatience for the return of Sherbroke
was inexpressible. They doubted not but that letter had contained the
long-expected intelligence.

"After the interval of an hour, Sherbroke joined them. No one dared
inquire the nature of his correspondence; but they waited in mute
attention, expecting that he would himself touch upon the subject. His
mind was manifestly full of thoughts that pained, bewildered, and
oppressed him. He drew near to the fire-place, and leaning his head on the
mantlepiece, after a pause of some moments, said in a low voice to the
person who was nearest him, Wynyard's brother was dead. 'Dear John, break
to your friend Wynyard the death of his favourite brother.' _He had died
on the day and at the very hour on which the friends had seen his spirit
pass so mysteriously through the apartment._

"It might have been imagined that these events would have been sufficient
to have impressed the mind of Sherbroke with the conviction of their
truth, but so strong was his prepossession against the existence or even
the possibility of any preternatural intercourse with the spirits of the
departed, that he still entertained a doubt of the report of his senses,
supported as their testimony was by the coincidence of sight and event.
Some years after, on his return to England, he was with two gentlemen in
Piccadilly, when on the opposite side of the street he saw a person
bearing the most striking resemblance to the figure which had been
disclosed to Wynyard and himself. His companions were acquainted with the
story, and he instantly directed their attention to the gentleman
opposite, as the individual who had contrived to enter and depart from
Wynyard's apartment without their being conscious of the means.

"Full of this impression, he immediately went over and addressed the
gentleman. He now fully expected to elucidate the mystery. He apologized
for the interruption, but excused it by relating the occurrence which had
induced him to the commission of this solecism in manners. The gentleman
received him as a friend. He had never been out of the country, but he was
the twin brother of the youth whose spirit had been seen.

"From the interesting character of this narration--the facts of the vision
occurring in daylight, and to two persons; and of the subsequent
verification of likeness by the party not previously acquainted with the
subject of the vision, it is much to be regretted that no direct report of
particulars had come to us. There is all other desirable authentication
for the story, and sufficient evidence to prove that the two gentlemen
believed and often told nearly what is here reported.

"Dr. Mayo makes the following statement on the subject: 'I have had
opportunities of inquiring of two near relations of this General Wynyard,
upon what evidence the above story rests. They told me that they had each
heard it from his own mouth. More recently a gentleman, whose accuracy of
recollection exceeds that of most people, had told me that he had heard
the late Sir John Sherbroke, the other party in the ghost story, tell it
in much the same way at the dinner-table. A writer in 'Notes and Queries'
for July 3, 1858, states that the brother, not twin-brother, whose spirit
appeared to Wynyard and his friend, was John Otway Wynyard, Lieutenant in
the 3rd Regiment of Foot-guards, who died on the 15th of October, 1785. As
this gentleman writes with a minute knowledge of the family history, this
date may be considered as that of the alleged spiritual incident.

"In 'Notes and Queries' for July 2nd, 1859, appeared a correspondence,
giving the strongest testimony then attainable to the truth of the
Wynyard ghost story. A series of queries on the subject being drawn up at
Quebec, by Sir John Harvey, Adjutant-General of the forces in Canada, was
sent to Colonel Gore of the same garrison, who was understood to be a
survivor of the officers who were with Sherbroke and Wynyard at the time
of the occurrence, and Colonel Gore explicitly replied to the following
effect: He was present at Sydney, in the island of Cape Breton, in the
autumn of 1785 or 1786, when the incident happened. It was in the then new
barrack, and the place was blocked up by ice so as to have no
communication with any part of the world. He was one of the first persons
who entered the room after the apparition was seen. The ghost passed them
as they were sitting at coffee, between eight and nine in the evening, and
went into G. Wynyard's bed closet, the window of which was putt[i]ed down.
He next day suggested to Sherbroke the propriety of making a memorandum of
the incident, which was done. 'I remember the date, and on the 6th of June
our first letters from England brought the news of John Wynyard's death,
[which had happened] on the very night they saw his apparition.' Colonel
Gore was under the impression that the person afterwards seen in one of
the streets of London, by Sherbroke and William Wynyard, was not a brother
of the latter family, but a gentleman named (he thought) Hayman, noted for
being like the deceased John Wynyard, and who affected to dress like
him."
