So much for these records and testimonies. The following, now to be
narrated, not altogether unlike them, and producing a good result on the
person who witnessed the apparition, is of almost equal interest:--

"Lord Chedworth[8] had living with him the orphan daughter of a sister of
his, a Miss Wright, who often related this circumstance: Lord Chedworth
was a good man, and seemed anxious to do his duty, but, unfortunately, he
had considerable intellectual doubts as to the existence of the soul in
another world. He had a great friendship for a gentleman, whom he had
known from his boyhood, and who was, like himself, one of those
unbelieving mortals that must have ocular demonstration for everything.
They often met, and often, too, renewed the subject so interesting to
both; but neither could help the other to that happy conviction which was
honestly wished for by each.

"One morning Miss Wright observed on her uncle joining her at breakfast, a
considerable gloom of thought and trouble displayed on his countenance.
He ate little, and was unusually silent. At last, he said, 'Molly' (for
thus he familiarly called her), 'I had a strange visitor last night. My
old friend B---- came to me.'

"'How?' said Miss Wright, 'did he come after I went to bed?'

"'His spirit did,' said Lord Chedworth, solemnly.

"'Oh! my dear uncle, how could the spirit of a living man appear?' said
she, smiling.

"'He is dead, beyond doubt,' replied his lordship; 'listen, and then laugh
as much as you please. I had not entered my bedroom many minutes when he
stood before me. Like you, I could not but think that I was looking on the
living man, and so accosted him; but he answered, "Chedworth, I died this
night at eight o'clock; I come to tell you, that there is another world
beyond the grave; and that there is a righteous God Who judgeth all."'

"'Depend upon it, uncle, it was only a dream!' But while Miss Wright was
thus speaking a groom on horseback rode up the avenue, and immediately
after delivered a letter to Lord Chedworth, announcing the sudden death of
his friend. Whatever construction the reader may be disposed to put upon
this narrative, it is not unimportant to add that the effect upon the mind
of Lord Chedworth was as happy as it was permanent. All his doubts were at
once removed, and for ever."
