The well-known Lyttelton Ghost Story may now be fitly recorded. It created
a great and widespread interest at the time of its occurrence, and was
criticised and commented upon by many. Several versions of it have already
appeared in print, and they seem to vary in certain unimportant details.
The Editor, instead of writing out what has already appeared, prefers to
set forth at length various documents containing independent evidence of
the truth of the several apparitions, which by the courtesy and kindness
of the present accomplished bearer of the title, he is enabled to embody
_verbatim_ in this volume, having been permitted to transcribe them from
the originals in Lord Lyttelton's possession.

The subject of this narrative was the son of George, Lord Lyttelton, who
was alike distinguished for the raciness of his wit and the profligacy of
his manners. The latter trait of his character has induced many persons to
suppose the apparition which he asserted he had seen, to have been the
effect of a conscience quickened with remorse and misgivings, on account
of many vices. The probability of the narrative[9] has, consequently, been
much questioned; but two gentlemen, one of whom was at Pitt Place, the
seat of Lord Lyttelton, and the other in the immediate neighbourhood, at
the time of his lordship's death, bore ample testimony to the veracity of
the whole affair. The several narratives of the singular occurrence
correspond in material points; and the following are the circumstantial
particulars written by the gentleman who was at the time on a visit to his
lordship:--

"I was at Pitt Place, Epsom, when Lord Lyttelton died; Lord Fortescue,
Mrs. Flood, and the two Miss Amphletts were also present. Lord Lyttelton
had not long been returned from Ireland, and frequently had been seized
with suffocating fits; he was attacked several times by them in the course
of the preceding month, while he was at his house in Hill Street, Berkeley
Square. It happened that he dreamt, three days before his death, that he
saw a fluttering bird, and afterwards a woman appeared to him in white
apparel and said to him, 'Prepare to die, you will not exist three days!'
His lordship was much alarmed, and called to a servant from a closet
adjoining, who found him much agitated and in a profuse perspiration; the
circumstance had a considerable effect all the next day on his lordship's
spirits. On the third day, while his lordship was at breakfast with the
above personages, he said, 'If I live over to-night I shall have jockied
the ghost, for this is the third day.' The whole party presently set off
for Pitt Place, where they had not long arrived before his lordship was
visited by one of his accustomed fits. After a short interval he
recovered. He dined at five o'clock that day, and went to bed at eleven,
when his servant was about to give him rhubarb and mint-water, but his
lordship perceiving him stir it with a toothpick, called him a slovenly
dog, and bade him go and fetch a teaspoon; but on the man's return he
found his Master in a fit, and the pillow being placed high, his chin
bore hard upon his neck, when the servant, instead of relieving his master
on the instant from his perilous situation, ran in his fright and called
out for help, but on his return he found his lordship dead.

"In explanation of this strange tale it is said that Lord Lyttelton
acknowledged, previously to his death, that the woman he had seen in his
dream was the 'mother' of the two Misses Amphletts mentioned above, whom,
together with a third sister then in Ireland, his lordship had seduced and
prevailed on to leave their parent, who resided near his country residence
in Shropshire. It is further stated that Mrs. Amphlett died of grief
through the desertion of her children at the precise time when the female
vision appeared to his lordship. The most surprising part of the story,
because the most difficult of explanation, yet remains to be related. On
the second day Miles Peter Andrews, one of Lord Lyttelton's most intimate
friends, left the dinner-party at an early hour, being called away upon
business to Dartford, where he was the owner of certain powder-mills. He
had all along professed himself one of the most determined sceptics as to
the vision, and therefore ceased to think of it. On the third night,
however, when he had been in bed about half an hour, and still remained,
as he imagined, wide awake, his curtains were suddenly pulled aside, and
Lord Lyttelton appeared before him in his robe-de-chambre and night-cap.
Mr. Andrews gazed at his visitor for some time in silent wonder, and then
began to reproach him for so odd a freak in coming down to Dartford Mills
without any previous notice, as he hardly knew how on the emergency to
find his lordship the requisite accommodation. 'Nevertheless,' said
Andrews, 'I will get up and see what can be done for you.' With this view
he turned aside to ring the bell; but on looking round again he could see
no signs of his strange visitor. Soon afterwards the bell was rung for his
servant, and upon his asking what had become of Lord Lyttelton, the man,
evidently much surprised at the question, replied that he had seen nothing
of him since they had left Pitt Place. 'Psha, you fool,' exclaimed Mr.
Andrews, 'he was here this moment at my bedside.' The servant, more
astonished than ever, declared that he did not well understand how that
could be, since he must have seen him enter; whereupon Mr. Andrews rose,
and having dressed himself, searched the house and grounds, but Lord
Lyttelton was nowhere to be found. Still, he could not help believing that
his friend, who was fond of practical jokes, had played him this trick for
his previously expressed scepticism in the matter of the dream. But he
soon viewed the whole affair in a different light. About four o'clock on
the same day an express arrived from a friend with the news of Lord
Lyttelton's death, and the whole manner of it, as related by the valet to
those who were in the house at the time. In Mr. Andrews's subsequent
visits to Pitt Place, no solicitations could ever induce him to sleep
there; he would invariably return, however late, to the Spread Eagle Inn,
at Epsom, for the night."
