    REMARKABLE DREAM OF THOMAS, LORD LYTTELTON.[10]

    "On Thursday, the 25th of November, 1779, Thomas, Lord Lyttelton,
    when he came to breakfast, declared to Mrs. Flood, wife of Frederick
    Flood, Esq., of the kingdom of Ireland, and to the three Miss
    Amphletts, who were lodged in his house in Hill Street, London (where
    he then also was), that he had had an extraordinary dream the night
    before. He said he thought he was in a room which a bird flew into,
    which appearance was suddenly changed into that of a woman dressed in
    white, who bade him prepare to die. To which he answered, 'I hope not
    soon, not in two months.' She replied, 'Yes, in three days.' He said
    he did not much regard it, because he could in some measure account
    for it; for that a few days before he had been with Mrs. Dawson when a
    robin-redbreast flew into her room.

    "When he had dressed himself that day to go to the House of Lords, he
    said he thought he did not look as if he was likely to die. In the
    evening of the following day, being Friday, he told the eldest Miss
    Amphlett that she looked melancholy; but, said he, 'You are foolish
    and fearful. I have lived two days, and, God willing, I will live out
    the third.'

    "On the morning of Saturday he told the same ladies that he was very
    well, and believed he should bilk the ghost. Some hours afterwards he
    went with them, Mr. Fortescue, and Captain Wolseley, to Pitt Place, at
    Epsom; withdrew to his bed-chamber soon after eleven o'clock at night,
    talked cheerfully to his servant, and particularly inquired of him
    what care had been taken to provide good rolls for his breakfast the
    next morning, stepped into his bed with his waistcoat on, and as his
    servant was pulling it off, put his hand to his side, sunk back and
    immediately expired without a groan. He ate a good dinner after his
    arrival at Pitt Place, took an egg for his supper, and did not seem to
    be at all out of order, except that while he was eating his soup at
    dinner he had a rising in his throat, a thing which had often happened
    to him before, and which obliged him to spit some of it out. His
    physician, Dr. Fothergill, told me Lord Lyttelton had in the summer
    preceding a bad pain in his side, and he judged that some gut vessel
    in the part where he felt the pain gave way, and to that he
    conjectured his death was owing. His declaration of his dream and his
    expressions above mentioned, consequential thereon, were upon a close
    inquiry asserted to me to have been so, by Mrs. Flood, the eldest Miss
    Amphlett, Captain Wolseley, and his valet-de-chambre Faulkner,[11] who
    dressed him on the Thursday; and the manner of his death was related
    to me by William Stuckey, in the presence of Mr. Fortescue and Captain
    Wolseley, Stuckey being the servant who attended him in his
    bed-chamber, and in whose arms he died.

        "Westcote.[12]

    "February the 13th, 1780."
