Lord Lyttelton is also asserted to have appeared to Mr. Andrews, his
friend and boon companion, at the time of his lordship's sudden and
mysterious death. Of this fact testimony is furnished by Mr. Plumer Ward,
M.P., in his "Illustrations of Human Life," from which (vol. i. p. 165)
the following narrative is taken:--

"I had often heard much and read much of Lord Lyttelton's seeing a ghost
before his death, and of himself as a ghost appearing to Mr. Andrews; and
one evening, sitting near that gentleman, during a pause in the debates in
the House of Commons, I ventured to ask him whether there was any and what
truth in the detailed story so confidently related. Mr. Andrews, as
perhaps I ought to have expected, did not much like the conversation. He
looked grave and uneasy, and I asked pardon for my impertinent curiosity.
Upon this he good-naturedly said, 'It is not a subject I am fond of, and
least of all in such a place as this; but if you will come and dine with
me, I will tell you what is true and what is false.' I gladly accepted the
proposal, and I think my recollection is perfect as to the following
narrative:--'Mr. Andrews in his youth was the boon-companion, not to say
fellow-rake, of Lord Lyttelton, who, as is well known, was a man
distinguished for abilities, but also for a profligacy of morals which few
could equal. With all this he was remarkable for what may be called
unnatural cowardice in one so determinedly wicked. He never repented, yet
could never stifle his conscience. He never could allow, yet never could
deny, a world to come, and he contemplated with unceasing terror what
would probably be his own state in such a world if there was one. He was
always melancholy with fear, or mad in defiance; and probably his
principal misery here was, that with all his endeavours, he never could
extinguish the dread of an hereafter.... Andrews was at his house at
Dartford when Lord Lyttelton died at Pitt Place, Epsom, thirty miles off.
Andrews' house was full of company, and he expected Lord Lyttelton, whom
he had left in his usual state of health, to join them the next day, which
was Sunday. Andrews himself feeling much indisposed on the Saturday
evening, retired early to bed, and requested Mrs. Pigou, one of his
guests, to do the honours of the supper-table. He admitted that, when in
bed, he fell into a feverish sleep, but was waked between eleven and
twelve by somebody opening his curtains. It was Lord Lyttelton in a
night-gown and cap, which Andrews recognized. He also plainly spoke to
him, saying he was come to tell him all was over. The world said he
informed him there was another state, and bade him repent, &c. That was
not so. And I confine myself to the exact words of this relation.

"'Now it seems that Lord Lyttelton was fond of horse-play, or what we
should call _mauvaise plaisanterie_; and, having often made Andrews the
subject of it, the latter had threatened him with manual chastisement
next time it occurred. On the present occasion, thinking this annoyance
renewed, he threw the first thing he could find, which were his slippers,
at Lord Lyttelton's head. The figure retreated towards a dressing-room
which had no ingress or egress except through the bed-chamber, and
Andrews, very angry, leapt out of bed, to follow it into the
dressing-room. It was not there. Surprised, he returned to the bedroom,
which he strictly searched. The door was locked on the inside, yet no Lord
Lyttelton was to be found. He was astonished, but not alarmed, so
convinced was he that it was some trick of Lord Lyttelton, who, he
supposed, had arrived, according to his engagement, but after he, Andrews,
had retired. He therefore rang for his servant, and asked if Lord
Lyttelton was not come. The man said, "No." "You may depend upon it,"
replied he, out of humour, "he is somewhere in the house, for he was here
just now, and is playing some trick." But how he could have got into the
bedroom with the door locked puzzled both master and man. Convinced,
however, that he was somewhere in the house, Andrews, in his anger,
ordered that no bed should be given him, saying he might go to an inn, or
sleep in the stables. Be that as it may, he never appeared again, and
Andrews went to sleep.

"'It happened that Mrs. Pigou was to go to town early the next morning.
What was her astonishment, having heard the disturbance of the night
before, to hear on her arrival about nine o'clock that Lord Lyttelton had
died the very night he was supposed to have been seen. She immediately
sent an express to Dartford with the news; upon the receipt of which,
Andrews, (quite well, and remembering accurately all that had passed,)
swooned away. He could not understand it, but it had a most serious effect
upon him, so that--to use his own expression--he "was not his own man
again for three years."'

"Such is the celebrated story; stript of its ornamentations and
exaggerations; and for one, I own, if not convinced that this was a real
message from Heaven, which certainly I am not, I at least think the hand
of Providence was seen in it; working upon the imagination, if you please,
and therefore suspending no law of Nature (though that after all is an
ambiguous term), but still Providence, in a character not to be mistaken."
