XXI. BETH GELLERT.

_Source._--I have paraphrased the well-known poem of Hon. W. R.
Spencer, "Beth Gêlert, or the Grave of the Greyhound," first printed
privately as a broadsheet in 1800 when it was composed ("August 11,
1800, Dolymalynllyn" is the colophon). It was published in Spencer's
_Poems_, 1811, pp. 78-86. These dates, it will be seen, are of
importance. Spencer states in a note: "The story of this ballad is
traditionary in a village at the foot of Snowdon where Llewellyn the
Great had a house. The Greyhound named Gêlert was given him by his
father-in-law, King John, in the year 1205, and the place to this day
is called Beth-Gêlert, or the grave of Gêlert." As a matter of fact,
no trace of the tradition in connection with Bedd Gellert can be found
before Spencer's time. It is not mentioned in Leland's _Itinerary_,
ed. Hearne, v., p. 37 ("Beth Kellarth"), in Pennant's _Tour_ (1770),
ii., 176, or in Bingley's _Tour in Wales_ (1800). Borrow in his _Wild
Wales_, p. 146, gives the legend, but does not profess to derive it
from local tradition.

_Parallels._--The only parallel in Celtdom is that noticed by Croker
in his third volume, the legend of Partholan who killed his wife's
greyhound from jealousy: this is found sculptured in stone at Ap
Brune, co. Limerick. As is well known, and has been elaborately
discussed by Mr. Baring-Gould (_Curious Myths of the Middle Ages_, p.
134 _seq._), and Mr. W. A. Clouston (_Popular Tales and Fictions_,
ii., 166 _seq._), the story of the man who rashly slew the dog
(ichneumon, weasel, &c.) that had saved his babe from death, is one of
those which have spread from East to West. It is indeed, as Mr.
Clouston points out, still current in India, the land of its birth.
There is little doubt that it is originally Buddhistic: the late Prof.
S. Beal gave the earliest known version from the Chinese translation
of the _Vinaya Pitaka_ in the _Academy_ of Nov. 4, 1882. The
conception of an animal sacrificing itself for the sake of others is
peculiarly Buddhistic; the "hare in the moon" is an apotheosis of
such a piece of self sacrifice on the part of Buddha (_Sasa Jataka_).
There are two forms that have reached the West, the first being that
of an animal saving men at the cost of its own life. I pointed out an
early instance of this quoted by a Rabbi of the second century, in my
_Fables of Æsop_, i., 105. This concludes with a strangely close
parallel to Gellert; "They raised a cairn over his grave, and the
place is still called The Dog's Grave." The _Culex_ attributed to
Virgil seems to be another variant of this. The second form of the
legend is always told as a moral apologue against precipitate action,
and originally occurred in _The Fables of Bidpai_ in its hundred and
one forms, all founded on Buddhistic originals (_cf._ Benfey,
_Pantschatantra_, Einleitung, § 201).[2] Thence, according to Benfey,
it was inserted in the _Book of Sindibad_, another collection of
Oriental Apologues framed on what may be called the Mrs. Potiphar
formula. This came to Europe with the Crusades, and is known in its
Western versions as the _Seven Sages of Rome_. The Gellert story
occurs in all the Oriental and Occidental versions; _e. g._, it is the
First Master's story in Wynkyn de Worde's (ed. G. L. Gomme, for the
Villon Society.) From the _Seven Sages_ it was taken into the
particular branch of the _Gesta Romanorum_ current in England and
known as the English _Gesta_, where it occurs as c. xxxii, "Story of
Folliculus." We have thus traced it to England whence it passed to
Wales, where I have discovered it as the second apologue of the
"Fables of Cattwg the Wise," in the Iolo MS. published by the Welsh
MS. Society, p. 561, "The man who killed his Greyhound." (These
Fables, Mr. Nutt informs me, are a pseudonymous production probably of
the sixteenth century.) This concludes the literary route of the
Legend of Gellert from India to Wales: Buddhistic _Vinaya
Pitaka_--_Fables of Bidpai_;--Oriental _Sindibad_;--Occidental _Seven
Sages of Rome_;--"English" (Latin), _Gesta Romanorum_;--Welsh, _Fables
of Cattwg_.

[Footnote 2: It occurs in the same chapter as the story of La
Perrette, which has been traced, after Benfey, by Prof. M. Müller in
his "Migration of Fables." (_Sel. Essays_, i., 500-74); exactly the
same history applies to Gellert.]

[Illustration:]

_Remarks._--We have still to connect the legend with Llewelyn and
with Bedd Gelert. But first it may be desirable to point out why it is
necessary to assume that the legend is a legend and not a fact. The
saving of an infant's life by a dog, and the mistaken slaughter of the
dog, are not such an improbable combination as to make it impossible
that the same event occurred in many places. But what is impossible,
in my opinion, is that such an event should have independently been
used in different places as the typical instance of, and warning
against, rash action. That the Gellert legend, before it was
localised, was used as a moral apologue in Wales is shown by the fact
that it occurs among the Fables of Cattwg, which are all of that
character. It was also utilised as a proverb: "_Yr wy'n edivaru
cymmaint a'r Gwr a laddodd ei Vilgi_ ("I repent as much as the man
who slew his greyhound"). The fable indeed, from this point of view,
seems greatly to have attracted the Welsh mind, perhaps as of especial
value to a proverbially impetuous temperament. Croker (_Fairy Legends
of Ireland_, vol. iii., p. 165) points out several places where the
legend seems to have been localised in place-names--two places, called
"Gwal y Vilast" ("Greyhound's Couch"), in Carmathen and
Glamorganshire; "Llech y Asp" ("Dog's Stone"), in Cardigan, and
another place named in Welsh "Spring of the Greyhound's Stone." Mr.
Baring-Gould mentions that the legend is told of an ordinary
tomb-stone, with a knight and a greyhound, in Abergavenny Church;
while the Fable of Cattwg is told of a man in Abergarwan. So
wide-spread and well-known was the legend that it was in Richard III's
time adopted as the national crest. In the Warwick Roll, at the
Herald's Office, after giving separate crests for England, Scotland,
and Ireland, that for Wales is given as figured in the margin, and
blazoned "on a coronet in a cradle or, a greyhound argent for Walys"
(see J. R. Planché, _Twelve Designs for the Costume of Shakespeare's
Richard III._, 1830, frontispiece). If this Roll is authentic, the
popularity of the legend is thrown back into the fifteenth century. It
still remains to explain how and when this general legend of rash
action was localised and specialised at Bedd Gelert: I believe I have
discovered this. There certainly was a local legend about a dog named
Gelert at that place; E. Jones, in the first edition of his _Musical
Relicks of the Welsh Bards, 1784_, p. 40, gives the following _englyn_
or epigram:

    Claddwyd Cylart celfydd (ymlyniad)
      Ymlaneau Efionydd
    Parod giuio i'w gynydd
      Parai'r dydd yr heliai Hydd;

which he Englishes thus:

    The remains of famed Cylart, so faithful and good,
      The bounds of the cantred conceal;
    Whenever the doe or the stag he pursued
      His master was sure of a meal.

No reference was made in the first edition to the Gellert legend, but
in the second edition of 1794, p. 75, a note was added telling the
legend, "There is a general tradition in North Wales that a wolf had
entered the house of Prince Llewellyn. Soon after the Prince returned
home, and, going into the nursery, he met his dog _Kill-hart_, all
bloody and wagging his tail at him; Prince Llewellyn, on entering the
room found the cradle where his child lay overturned, and the floor
flowing with blood; imagining that the greyhound had killed the child,
he immediately drew his sword and stabbed it; then, turning up the
cradle, found under it the child alive, and the wolf dead. This so
grieved the Prince, that he erected a tomb over his faithful dog's
grave; where afterwards the parish church was built and goes by that
name--_Bedd Cilhart_, or the grave of Kill-hart, in _Carnarvonshire_.
From this incident is elicited a very common Welsh proverb [that given
above which occurs also in 'The Fables of Cattwg;' it will be observed
that it is quite indefinite.]" "Prince Llewellyn ab Jorwerth married
Joan, [natural] daughter of King John, by _Agatha_, daughter of Robert
Ferrers Earl of Derby; and the dog was a present to the prince from
his father-in-law about the year 1205." It was clearly from this note
that the Hon. Mr. Spencer got his account; oral tradition does not
indulge in dates _Anno Domini_. The application of the general legend
of "the man who slew his greyhound" to the dog Cylart, was due to the
learning of E. Jones, author of the _Musical Relicks_. I am convinced
of this, for by a lucky chance I am enabled to give the real legend
about Cylart, which is thus given in Carlisle's _Topographical
Dictionary of Wales_, s.v., "Bedd Celert," published in 1811, the date
of publication of Mr. Spencer's _Poems_. "Its name, according to
tradition, implies _The Grave of Celert_, a greyhound which belonged
to Llywelyn, the last Prince of Wales: and a large Rock is still
pointed out as the monument of this celebrated Dog, being on the spot
where it was found dead, together with the stag which it had pursued
from Carnarvon," which is thirteen miles distant. The cairn was thus a
monument of a "record" run of a greyhound: the _englyn_ quoted by
Jones is suitable enough for this, while quite inadequate to record
the later legendary exploits of Gêlert. Jones found an _englyn_
devoted to _an_ exploit of a dog named Cylart, and chose to interpret
it in his second edition, 1794, as _the_ exploit of a greyhound with
which all the world (in Wales) were acquainted. Mr. Spencer took the
legend from Jones (the reference to the date 1205 proves that),
enshrined it in his somewhat _banal_ verses, which were lucky enough
to be copied into several reading-books, and thus became known to all
English-speaking folk.

It remains only to explain why Jones connected the legend with
Llewelyn. Llewelyn had local connection with Bedd Gellert, which was
the seat of an Augustinian abbey, one of the oldest in Wales. An
inspeximus of Edward I. given in Dugdale, _Monast. Angl._, ed. pr.
ii., 100a, quotes as the earliest charter of the abbey "Cartam
Lewelini magni." The name of the abbey was "Beth Kellarth"; the name
is thus given by Leland, _l. c._, and as late as 1794 an engraving at
the British Museum is entitled "Beth Kelert," while Carlisle gives it
as "Beth Celert." The place was thus named after the abbey, not after
the cairn or rock. This is confirmed by the fact of which Prof. Rhys
had informed me, that the collocation of letters _rt_ is un-Welsh.
Under these circumstances it is not impossible, I think, that the
earlier legends of the marvellous run of "Cylart" from Carnarvon was
due to the etymologising fancy of some English-speaking Welshman who
interpreted the name as Kill-hart, so that the simpler legend would be
only a folk-etymology.

But whether Kellarth, Kelert, Cylart, Gêlert or Gellert ever existed
and ran a hart from Carnarvon to Bedd Gellert or no, there can be
little doubt after the preceding that he was not the original hero of
the fable of "the man that slew his greyhound," which came to Wales
from Buddhistic India through channels which are perfectly traceable.
It was Edward Jones who first raised him to that proud position, and
William Spencer who securely installed him there, probably for all
time. The legend is now firmly established at Bedd Gellert. There is
said to be an ancient air, "Bedd Gelert," "as sung by the Ancient
Britons"; it is given in a pamphlet published at Carnarvon in the
"fifties," entitled _Gellert's Grave; or, Llewellyn's Rashness: a
Ballad, by the Hon. W. R. Spencer, to which is added that ancient
Welsh air, "Bedd Gelert," as sung by the Ancient Britons_. The air is
from R. Roberts' "Collection of Welsh Airs," but what connection it
has with the legend I have been unable to ascertain. This is probably
another case of adapting one tradition to another. It is almost
impossible to distinguish palæozoic and cainozoic strata in oral
tradition. According to Murray's _Guide to N. Wales_, p. 125, the only
authority for the cairn now shown is that of the landlord of the Goat
Inn, "who felt compelled by the cravings of tourists to invent a
grave." Some old men at Bedd Gellert, Prof. Rhys informs me, are ready
to testify that they saw the cairn laid. They might almost have been
present at the birth of the legend, which, if my affiliation of it is
correct, is not yet quite 100 years old.

