THE LADY OF LLYN-Y-FAN FACH


Not many miles from Llandovery, in the midst of glorious mountain
scenery, is a lovely little lake known as Llyn-y-Fan-Fach, the scene of
a very remarkable occurrence. Once upon a time a simple cowherd, eating
his frugal meal by the edge of the water, observed with amazement,
seated upon the calm surface of the lake, the most beautiful woman he
had ever seen. So great was his admiration for her that he cried out,
and she, turning to him, gave a rapturous smile and silently disappeared
beneath the waters.

The peasant was distracted, for he had fallen deeply in love with the
beautiful lady. He waited until dark, but she did not appear again;
but at daybreak the next morning he returned once more, and was again
rewarded by the sight of his enchantress and another of her alluring
smiles.

Several times more he saw her and each time he besought her to be his
wife, but she only smiled and disappeared, until at length one evening,
just as the sun was setting, the beautiful lady appeared, and this time,
instead of diving beneath the surface, she came to the shore, and,
after some persuasion, consented to marry the youth. But she made one
condition: if ever he should strike her three blows without cause she
would leave him, she said, and their marriage would be at an end.

So the two were married happily and went to live at Esgair Laethdy, near
Myddfai, the maiden bringing with her as dowry a large number of cattle
and horses which she called up from the bottom of the lake.

For years the couple lived in great prosperity and happiness, and three
handsome sons were born to them; then the day arrived when husband and
wife were setting out for a christening, and, being rather late, the
husband slapped his wife merrily on the shoulder, urging her to hurry.
Sadly she reminded him that he had struck her the first of the causeless
blows.

Years passed by, and the couple were at a wedding. In the midst of
all the merry-making the wife burst suddenly into tears. Patting her
sympathetically on the arm, the man inquired the cause of her weeping,
and she, sobbing the harder, reminded him that he had struck her a
second time.

Now that he had only one chance left, the husband was particularly
careful never to forget and strike the third and last blow; but, after
a long while, at a funeral one day, while all were sobbing and weeping,
the beautiful lady suddenly began laughing merrily. Touching her gently
to quiet her, the husband realised that the end had come.

"The last blow has been struck; our marriage is ended," said the wife,
now in tears; and with that she started off across the hills to their
farm. There she called together her cattle and other stock, which
immediately obeyed her voice, and, led by the beautiful lady, the whole
procession moved off across the mountains back to the lake.

Among the animals was a team of four oxen which were ploughing at the
time. They followed, too, plough and all, and, they say, to this very
day you may see a well-marked furrow running right across the Myddfai
mountain to the edge of Llyn-y-Fan-Fach, which proves the truth of this
story.

The disconsolate husband never saw his lady again, but she used
sometimes to appear to her sons, and she gave them such wonderful
knowledge that all three became the most famous doctors in that part
of Wales.

Llandovery, from which place you may visit the scenes of this legend,
is a charming little town in East Carmarthenshire, situated in glorious
surroundings of mountains, vale, and moorland, where some of the finest
salmon and trout fishing in South Wales may be enjoyed. It stands in the
beautiful Towy Valley, on a branch line which runs up into the mountain
country from Llanelly. Llandovery is famous for its air, which is said
to be the purest and most bracing in the district.

[Illustration: _Landovery Castle_]

[Illustration]



