THE OLD WOMAN WHO FOOLED THE DEVIL


One of the most beautiful spots in all Wales is the Devil's Bridge--an
easy excursion into the hills from Aberystwyth--which spans the gorge
through which the Mynach cataract descends in four boiling leaps a
distance of two hundred and ten feet. How this place received its name
is an old story, which goes back to the days before the monks of sweetly
named Strata Florida, who subsequently replaced the earlier bridge
across the gorge.

The beginning of the story is told in an old rhyme which runs:--

  "_Old Megan Llandunach of Pont-y-Mynach_
     _Had lost her only cow;_
   _Across the ravine the cow was seen,_
     _But to get it she could not tell how._"


Such was the sad plight of old Megan, who was bemoaning the loss of her
property on the wrong side of the gorge so many years ago, when there
appeared to her suddenly a cowled monk, whose dark face was scarcely
discernible, with a rosary hanging to his girdle, and a deep but
pleasant voice.

Enquiring the cause of her distress, the monk, in sympathetic tones,
promised to aid her. He would, he said, build a bridge across the
ravine, so that she might recover her lost cow, if she would promise
to give him the first living being to cross the bridge.

This seemed a natural enough suggestion to the sorrowing old dame, for
the good monks of the neighbourhood were ever about the countryside,
seeking converts; so Megan agreed, and the monk set to work with amazing
energy and skill to construct the bridge. And as he worked Megan sat on
a boulder and watched him.

Before sundown the marvellous bridge was finished, and the smiling monk,
walking over it, invited Megan to follow him and seek her cow. But Megan
had been observant. She had noticed two or three things. One, that there
was no cross attached to the monk's rosary; another, that while he was
labouring at his building he had slipped, and his left leg was exposed
through his long habit, and the knee was on the back of the leg, and not
the front; also the leg ended not in a foot, but in a cloven hoof.

And cunning old Megan was taking no chances. Feeling in the pocket of
her skirt she found a crust, and walking to her side of the bridge she
called to a black cur that was playing about. Hurling the crust across
the bridge she bade the dog fetch it. He ran over the bridge, and Megan,
smiling at the monk, thanked him, and told him to take the dog as his
reward.

The devil, realising that he had been fooled, disappeared in an
awe-inspiring cloud of smoke and sulphur fumes; but the bridge remained,
and its name to this day recalls the discomfiture of his evil plans. So,
having fooled the devil, Megan was able to recover her lost cow.

Wordsworth and Borrow, among other famous writers, have immortalised
the impressive beauties of the Devil's Bridge and its roaring cataract.
It is easily reached from that most attractive of Welsh seaside towns,
Aberystwyth, and lies in a country dominated by great Plinlimmon, from
the top of which a view of unrivalled beauty may be obtained.

All about this country of mountain and moorland are scenes of intense
historic interest and natural beauty. It is a district bleak and bracing
on the summits, warm and sheltered in the valleys, and as yet quite
unspoiled by the crowd, as too is the charming town which is the centre
of this country.

Aberystwyth retains the quiet charm of an old-world "watering-place,"
and glories in its wonderful climate and healing sea breezes that blow
in across Cardigan Bay, which have won for it its reputation in winter
and summer for being a British Biarritz.

[Illustration: _Devil's Bridge, Aberystwyth_]

[Illustration]



