THE WOMEN SOLDIERS OF FISHGUARD


They tell a story down in Pembrokeshire of how the Welsh country-women
once defeated an invading army. It was in the days of the Napoleonic
wars when, on a winter's afternoon, four hostile ships appeared
unexpectedly off Fishguard Bay. On board were fourteen hundred soldiers
intent upon an invasion of Britain.

The wild country of the far west of Wales was in those days even more
remote than it is now. In the neighbourhood were but three hundred
militiamen, and the invaders had an easy task in landing at Llanwnda,
about two miles away from modern Fishguard, in a charming sheltered
inlet known as Careg Gwastad Bay.

But the gallant Welsh determined to drive out the invader. They were
furious, and, armed with scythes and other farm implements, they quickly
gathered together. For such firearms as they had there was little
ammunition, so they stripped the roof of beautiful little St. David's
Cathedral of its lead in order to make bullets.

And the women of the country followed their men. Clad in their red
cloaks and high black steeple-crowned hats, in the distance they had
all the appearance of regular soldiers, and the leader of the defending
forces was quick to realise this fact.

He marshalled them into something like military formation and marched
them about in various places where they could be seen by the invading
troops. Up and down hill the willing Welsh women trudged until darkness
fell and they were tired out.

Meanwhile there was consternation in the invaders' camp. The commander
knew that scarlet was the colour of our soldiers' uniform, and he could
only conclude that overwhelming reinforcements were arriving from the
interior. Believing his cause hopeless, he sent in a letter under a flag
of truce to the British commander, offering to surrender, and within
three days of landing the whole invading force was made prisoner.

There is an amazing sequel to this invasion, for it seems that most
of the troops employed were criminals, released from French gaols, and
other similar undesirable characters, and since they had failed in their
primary object the French Government was none too anxious to have them
back in France again, and refused to exchange them.

The British Government was no more pleased than the French to have so
unsavoury a band of ruffians in its midst, and it had at last to force
the Frenchmen to receive their own rogues back again. This was done by
threatening that if the prisoners were not exchanged within a certain
time they would be landed with arms on the coast of Brittany and left
to do their worst.

The French preferred to have them in control and exchanges were promptly
arranged, the discomfited invaders going back, it is assumed, to the
safety of the French prisons from which they had been brought.

Careg Gwastad Bay, the scene of this landing, is but one of the many
fascinating little inlets that abound along the coast in the Fishguard
neighbourhood. Excellent fishing--for sea fish, trout, sewin, and often
salmon--abounds off the coast or in the streams. Fishguard is fortunate
in possessing a modern steam-heated hotel close to the station--the
Fishguard Bay--which is equipped with every modern luxury and comfort.

From Fishguard one can approach, too, that romantic and historic
country known as Kemaes Land, which extends away to the borders of
Cardiganshire, a country--bounded on the north by the cliffs that run
down to the waters of Cardigan Bay--full of old churches, castles, and
strange remains of earlier civilisations, standing remote upon its
mountains and moorlands.

This is a land of flowers too, for its mild winter climate enables
many plants to flourish in the open that must seek the security of
greenhouses in the bleaker parts of the south.

[Illustration: _Welsh National Costume_]

[Illustration]



