III.

Of superstitions regarding salt, there are many in Wales. I have even
encountered the special custom of placing a plate of salt on the
breast of the corpse. In the case of an old woman from Cardiganshire,
who was buried at Cardiff, and who was thus decked by her relatives, I
was told the purpose of the plate of salt was to 'prevent swelling.'
There is an Irish custom of placing a plate of snuff on the body of a
corpse; hence the saying, addressed to an enemy, 'I'll get a pinch off
your belly yet.' The Irish also employ the plate of salt in the same
manner. In view of the universal prevalence of superstitions regarding
salt, too much weight should not be placed on this detail, in
connection with the accounts of the Sin-eater. Such superstitions are
of extreme antiquity, and they still survive even among the most
cultivated classes. Salt falling toward a person was of old considered
a most unlucky omen, the evil of which could only be averted by
throwing a little of the fallen salt over the shoulder. My own wife
observes this heathen rite to this day, and so, I fancy, do most men's
wives--jocularly, no doubt, but with a sort of feeling that 'if there
_is_ anything in it,' &c. Salt was the ancient symbol of friendship,
being deemed incorruptible. In the Isle of Man no important business
was ventured on without salt in the pocket; marrying, moving, even the
receiving of alms, must be sanctified by an exchange of salt between
the parties. An influential legend is noted among the Manx
inhabitants, of the dissolution of an enchanted palace on that island,
through the spilling of salt on the ground. In Da Vinci's picture of
the Lord's Supper, Judas Iscariot is represented as overturning the
salt--an omen of the coming betrayal of Christ by that personage. In
Russia, should a friend pass you the salt without smiling, a quarrel
will follow. The Scotch put salt in a cow's first milk after calving.
Even the Chinese throw salt into water from which a person has been
rescued from drowning. All these practices point either to lustration
or propitiation.

