V.

The funeral procession, in rural districts where hearses are unknown,
wends its way graveward on foot, with the corpse borne by the nearest
relatives of the deceased, a custom probably introduced in Wales
during their residence here by the Romans. The coffin of Metellus, the
conqueror of Macedon, was borne by his four sons. The coffins of Roman
citizens held in high esteem by the Republic, were borne by justices
and senators, while those of the enemies of the people were borne by
slaves and hired servants. As the Welsh procession winds its way along
the green lanes, psalms and hymns are sung continually, except on
coming to cross-roads. Here the bier is set down, and all kneel and
repeat the Lord's Prayer. The origin of this custom, as given by the
Welsh, is to be found in the former practice of burying criminals at
cross-roads. It was believed that the spirits of these criminals did
not go far away from the place where their bodies lay, and the
repeating of the Lord's Prayer was supposed to destroy and do away
with any evil influence these spirits might have on the soul of the
dear departed.[151]

The Welsh retain much of the superstitious feeling regarding the
graves of criminals and suicides. There is indeed a strong prejudice
against hanging, on account of the troublesome spirits thus let loose.
The well-known leniency of a 'Cardigan jury' may be connected with
this prejudice, though it is usually associated with a patriotic
feeling. 'What! would you have hur hang hur own countryman?' is the
famous response of a Cardigan juror, who was asked why he and his
brethren acquitted a murderer. The tale may be only a legend; the fact
it illustrates is patent. It is related that in a dispute between two
Cardigan farmers, some fifty years ago, one of them killed the other.
The jury, believing the killing was unintentional, acquitted the
homicide; but 'whether the man was guilty or not, his neighbours and
the people who lived in the district, and who knew the spot where the
farmer was killed, threw a stone upon it whenever they passed,
probably to show their abhorrence of the deed that had been
perpetrated in that place. By this means a large heap of stones, which
was allowed to remain for many years, arose.'[152] They were then
removed to repair the turnpike. This custom is apparently Jewish.
Hangings are almost unknown in Wales, whether from the extra morality
of the people, or the prejudice above noted.
