VII.

A curious surviving custom at Welsh funerals is the Offrwm, or
parson's penny. After having read the burial service in the church,
the parson stands behind a table while a psalm is being sung, and to
him go the mourners, one and all, and deposit a piece of money on the
table. The parson counts it, states the amount, and pockets it. If the
mourner depositing his offrwm be wealthy, he will give perhaps a
guinea; if a farmer or tradesman, his gift will be a crown; and if
poor, he will lay down his sixpence. 'Each one that intended making an
offering of silver, would go up to the altar in his turn, and after
each one had contributed there would be a respite, after which those
who gave copper as their offering went forward and did likewise; but
no coppers were offered at any respectable funeral. These offerings
often reached the sum of ten and even twenty pounds in the year.' Thus
the Welsh work, 'Cymru Fu,' speaking as usual in the past tense; but
the custom is a present-day one. The Welsh believe that this custom
was originally intended to compensate the clergyman for praying for
the soul of the departed. It has now ceased to mean anything more than
a tribute of respect to the deceased, or a token of esteem towards the
officiating clergyman.

In the parish of Defynog, Breconshire, there was a custom (up to 1843,
when it seems to have ceased through the angry action of a lawless
widower,) of giving to the parish clerk the best pair of shoes and
stockings left behind by the defunct.[153]

A still more curious form of the offrwm, which also survives in many
rural neighbourhoods, is called the Arian y Rhaw, or spade money. At
the grave, the gravedigger rubs the soil off his spade, extends it for
donations, and receives a piece of silver from each one in turn, which
he also pockets. In Merionethshire the money is received at the grave
in a bowl, instead of on the spade, and the gift is simply called the
offrwm. 'I well recollect, when a lad,' says an entertaining
correspondent,[154] 'at Llanrhaiadr-yn-Mochnant, seeing the clerk or
sexton cleaning his spade with the palm of his hand, and blowing the
remaining dust, so that the instrument of his calling should be clean
and presentable, and then, with due and clerk-like gravity, presenting
his polished spade, first to the "cyfneseifiaid" (next-of-kin), and
then to the mourners one by one, giving all an opportunity of showing
their respect to the dead, by giving the clerk the accustomed offrwm.
At times the old clerk, "yr hen glochydd," when collecting the offrwm,
rather than go around the grave to the people, to the no small
annoyance of the friends, would reach his spade over the grave. At the
particular time referred to, the clerk, having nearly had all the
offrwm, saw that facetious wag and practical joker, Mr. B., extending
his offering towards him from the opposite side of the grave. The
clerk, as was his wont, extended the spade over the grave towards the
offered gift. The opportunity for fun was not to be lost, and whilst
placing his offrwm on the spade, Mr. B. pressed on one corner, and the
spade turned in the hands of the unwitting clerk, emptying the whole
offering into the grave, to the no small surprise of the clerk, who
never forgot the lesson, and the great amusement of the standers-by.'
It is noted in this connection that the sexton's spade 'was a terror
to the superstitious, for if the gravedigger would but shake his spade
at anyone, it was a matter of but short time ere the sexton would be
called upon to dig the grave of that person who had come under the
evil influence of the spade. "Has the sexton shook his spade at you?"
was a question often put to a person in bad health.'
