I.

The human mind in its infancy turns instinctively to fetichism. The
mind of primeval man resembled that of a child. Children have to learn
by experience that the fire which burns them is not instigated by
malice.[158] In his primitive condition, man personified everything
in nature. Animate and inanimate objects were alike endowed with
feelings, passions, emotions, moral qualities. On this basis rests the
primeval mythology.

The numerous superstitions associated with bells, wells and stones in
Wales, excite constant inquiries as regards their origin in fetichism,
in paganism, in solar worship, or in church observances. That bells,
especially, should suggest the supernatural to the vulgar mind is not
strange. The occult powers of bells have place in the popular belief
of many lands. The Flemish child who wonders how the voices got into
the bells is paralleled by the Welsh lad who hears the bells of
Aberdovey talking in metrical words to a musical chime. The ghosts of
bells are believed to haunt the earth in many parts of Wales. Allusion
has been made to those castle bells which are heard ringing from the
submerged towers in Crumlyn lake. Like fancies are associated with
many Welsh lakes. In Langorse Pool, Breconshire, an ancient city is
said to lie buried, from whose cathedral bells on a calm day may be
heard a faint and muffled chime, pealing solemnly far down in the
sepial depths. A legend of Trefethin relates that in the church of St.
Cadoc, at that place, was a bell of wondrous powers, a gift from
Llewellyn ap Iorwerth, Lord of Caerleon. A little child who had
climbed to the belfry was struck by the bell and killed, not through
the wickedness of the bell itself, but through a spell which had been
put upon the unfortunate instrument by an evil spirit. But though
innocent of murderous intent, the wretched bell became forfeit to the
demons on account of its fatal deed. They seized it and bore it down
through the earth to the shadow-realm of annwn. And ever since that
day, when a child is accidentally slain at Trefethin, the bell of St.
Cadoc is heard tolling mournfully underneath the ground where it
disappeared ages ago.

FOOTNOTE:

[158] A Mississippi negro-boy who was brought by a friend of mine from
his southern home to a northern city, and who had never seen snow,
found the ground one morning covered with what he supposed to be salt,
and going out to get some, returned complaining that it 'bit his
fingers.'

