I.

The waters of mystery which flow at Lourdes, in France, are paralleled
in numberless Welsh parishes. In every corner of Cambria may be found
wells which possess definite attributes, malicious or beneficent,
which they are popularly supposed to actively exert toward mankind. In
almost every instance, the name of the tutelary saint to whom the well
is consecrated is known to the peasantry, and generally they can tell
you something about him, or her. Unnumbered centuries have elapsed
since the saint lived; nay, generation upon generation has perished
since any complete knowledge of his life or character existed, save in
mouldering manuscripts left by monks, themselves long turned to dust;
yet the tradition of the saint as regards the well is there, a living
thing beside its waters. However lightly some forms of superstition
may at times be treated by the vulgar, they are seldom capable of
irreverent remark concerning the well. In many cases this respect
amounts to awe.

These wells are of varying power and disposition. Some are healing
wells; others are cursing wells; still others combine the power alike
to curse and to cure. Some are sovereign in their influence over all
the diseases from which men suffer, mental and moral as well as
physical; others can cure but one disease, or one specific class of
diseases; and others remedy all the misfortunes of the race, make the
poor rich, the unhappy happy, and the unlucky lucky. That these
various reputations arose in some wells from medicinal qualities found
by experience to dwell in the waters, is clear at a glance; but in
many cases the character of the patron saint gives character to the
well. In parishes dedicated to the Virgin Mary there will almost
inevitably be found a Ffynon Mair, (Well of Mary,) the waters of which
are supposed to be purer than the waters of other wells. Sometimes the
people will take the trouble to go a long distance for water from the
Ffynon Mair, though a good well may be nearer, in whose water chemical
analysis can find no difference. Formerly, and indeed until within a
few years past, no water would do for baptizing but that fetched from
the Ffynon Mair, though it were a mile or more from the church. That
the water flowed southward was in some cases held to be a secret of
its virtue. In other instances, wells which opened and flowed eastward
were thought to afford the purest water.

