VII.

On Barry Island, near Cardiff, is the famous well of St. Barruc, or
Barri, which was still frequented by the credulous up to May, 1879, at
which time the island was closed against visitors by its owner, Lord
Windsor, and converted into a rabbit warren. Tradition directs that on
Holy Thursday he who is troubled with any disease of the eyes shall go
to this well, and having thoroughly washed his eyes in its water,
shall drop a pin in it. The innkeeper there formerly found great
numbers of pins--a pint, in one instance--when cleaning out the well.
It had long been utterly neglected by the sole resident of the island,
whose house was a long distance from the well, at a point nearer the
main land; but pins were still discovered there from time to time.
There was in old days a chapel on this island; no vestige of it
remains. Tradition says that St. Barruc was buried there, and the now
barren and deserted islet appears to have been anciently a popular
place among the saints. St. Cadoc had one of his residences
there.[164] He was one day sitting on a hill-top in that island when
he saw the two saints Barruc and Gwalches drawing near in a boat, and
as he looked the boat was overturned by the wind. Both saints were
drowned, and Cadoc's manual book, which they had in the boat with
them, was lost in the sea. But when Cadoc proceeded to order his
dinner, a salmon was brought to him which being cut open was found to
have the missing manual book in its belly in an unimpaired condition.
Concerning another saint whose name was Barri, a wonderful story is
told that one day being on a visit to St. David he borrowed the
latter's horse and rode across the sea from Pembrokeshire to the Irish
coast. Many have supposed this Barri to be the same person as Barruc,
but they were two men.

This romantic island was anciently celebrated for certain ghastly
noises which were heard in it--sounds resembling the clanking of
chains, hammering of iron, and blowing of bellows--and which were
supposed to be made by the fiends whom Merlin had set to work to frame
the wall of brass to surround Carmarthen. So the noises and eruptions
of Etna and Stromboli were in ancient times ascribed to Typhon or
Vulcan. But in the case of Barry I have been unable, by any assistance
from imagination, to detect these mystic sounds in our day. Camden, in
his 'Britannica,' makes a like remark, but says the tradition was
universally prevalent. The judicious Malkin, however, thinks it
requires but a moderate stretch of fancy to create this cyclopean
imagery, when the sea at high tides is often in possession of cavities
under the very feet of the stranger, and its voice is at once modified
and magnified by confinement and repercussion.[165]
