IV.

The Ellylldan is a species of elf exactly corresponding to the English
Will-o'-wisp, the Scandinavian Lyktgubhe, and the Breton Sand Yan y
Tad. The Welsh word dan means fire; dan also means a lure; the
compound word suggests a luring elf-fire. The Breton Sand Yan y Tad
(St. John and Father)[13] is a double ignis fatuus fairy, carrying at
its finger-ends five lights, which spin round like a wheel. The
negroes of the southern seaboard states of America invest this goblin
with an exaggeration of the horrible peculiarly their own. They call
it Jack-muh-lantern, and describe it as a hideous creature five feet
in height, with goggle-eyes and huge mouth, its body covered with long
hair, and which goes leaping and bounding through the air like a
gigantic grasshopper. This frightful apparition is stronger than any
man, and swifter than any horse, and compels its victims to follow it
into the swamp, where it leaves them to die.

Like all goblins of this class, the Ellylldan was, of course, seen
dancing about in marshy grounds, into which it led the belated
wanderer; but, as a distinguished resident in Wales has wittily said,
the poor elf 'is now starved to death, and his breath is taken from
him; his light is quenched for ever by the improving farmer, who has
drained the bog; and, instead of the rank decaying vegetation of the
autumn, where bitterns and snipes delighted to secrete themselves,
crops of corn and potatoes are grown.'[14]

A poetic account by a modern character, called Iolo the Bard, is thus
condensed: 'One night, when the moon had gone down, as I was sitting
on a hill-top, the Ellylldan passed by. I followed it into the valley.
We crossed plashes of water where the tops of bulrushes peeped above,
and where the lizards lay silently on the surface, looking at us with
an unmoved stare. The frogs sat croaking and swelling their sides, but
ceased as they raised a melancholy eye at the Ellylldan. The wild
fowl, sleeping with their heads under their wings, made a low cackle
as we went by. A bittern awoke and rose with a scream into the air. I
felt the trail of the eels and leeches peering about, as I waded
through the pools. On a slimy stone a toad sat sucking poison from the
night air. The Ellylldan glowed bravely in the slumbering vapours. It
rose airily over the bushes that drooped in the ooze. When I lingered
or stopped, it waited for me, but dwindled gradually away to a speck
barely perceptible. But as soon as I moved on again, it would shoot up
suddenly and glide before. A bat came flying round and round us,
flapping its wings heavily. Screech-owls stared silently at us with
their broad eyes. Snails and worms crawled about. The fine threads of
a spider's web gleamed in the light of the Ellylldan. Suddenly it shot
away from me, and in the distance joined a ring of its fellows, who
went dancing slowly round and round in a goblin dance, which sent me
off to sleep.'[15]
