XII.

Wells from which milk has flowed have been known in several places.
That Winifred's well indulged in this eccentricity on one occasion has
been noted. The well of St. Illtyd is celebrated for the like
performance. This well is in Glamorganshire, in the land called Gower,
near Swansea. It was about the nativity of John the Baptist, on the
fifth day of the week, in a year not specified, but certainly very
remote, that for three hours there flowed from this well a copious
stream of milk instead of water. That it was really milk we are not
left in any possible doubt, for 'many who were present testified that
while they were looking at the milky stream carefully and with
astonishment, they also saw among the gravel curds lying about in
every direction, and all around the edge of the well a certain fatty
substance floating about, such as is collected from milk, so that
butter can be made from it.'[168]

The origin of this well is a pleasing miracle, and recalls the story
of Canute; but while Canute's effort to command the sea was a failure
in the eleventh century, that of St. Illtyd five hundred years earlier
was a brilliant success. It appears that the saint was very pleasantly
established on an estate consisting of a field surrounded on all sides
by plains, with an intermediate grove, but was much afflicted by the
frequent overflowings of the sea upon his land. In vain he built and
rebuilt a very large embankment of mud mixed with stones, the rushing
waves burst through again and again. At last the saint's patience was
worn out, and he said, 'I will not live here any longer; I much wished
it, but troubled with this marine molestation, it is not in my power.
It destroys my buildings, it flows to the oratory which we built with
great labour.' However, the place was so convenient he was loth to
leave it, and he prayed for assistance. On the night before his
intended departure an angel came to him and bade him remain, and gave
him instructions for driving back the sea. Early in the morning Illtyd
went to the fluctuating sea and drove it back; it receded before him
'as if it were a sensible animal,' and left the shore dry. Then Illtyd
struck the shore with his staff, 'and thereupon flowed a very clear
fountain, which is also beneficial for curing diseases, and which
continues to flow without a falling off; and what is more wonderful,
although it is near the sea, the water emitted is pure.'[169]
