XIV.

The wide prevalence of some form of water-worship among Aryan peoples
is a fact of great significance. Superstitions in connection with
British wells are generally traceable to a Druidic origin. The worship
of natural objects in which the British Druids indulged, particularly
as regards rivers and fountains, probably had a connection with
traditions of the flood. When the early Christian preachers and
teachers encountered such superstitions among the people, they
carefully avoided giving unnecessary offence by scoffing at them; on
the contrary they preferred to adopt them, and to hallow them by
giving them Christian meanings. They utilized the old Druidic circles
as places of worship, chose young priests from among the educated
Druids, and consecrated to their own saints the mystic wells and
fountains. In this manner were continued practices the most ancient.
As time passed on, other wells were similarly sanctified, as the new
religion spread and parish churches were built. Disease and wickedness
being intimately associated in the popular mind--epileptics and like
sufferers being held to be possessed of devils, and even such vulgar
ills as warts and wens being considered direct results of some evil
deed, suffered or performed--so the waters of Christian baptism which
cleansed from sin, cleansed also from disease. Ultimately the virtue
of the waters came to be among the vulgar a thing apart from the rite
of baptism; the good was looked upon as dwelling in the waters
themselves, and the Christian rite as not necessarily an element in
the work of regeneration. The reader who will recall what has been
said in the chapter on changelings, in the first part of this volume,
will perceive a survival of the ancient creed herein, in the notion
that baptism is a preventive of fairy babe-thievery. Remembering that
the changeling notion is in reality nothing but a fanciful way of
accounting for the emaciation, ugliness, idiocy, bad temper--in a
word, the illness--of the child, it will be seen that the rite of
baptism, by curing the first manifestations of evil in the child's
system, was the orthodox means of preventing the fairies from working
their bad will on the poor innocent.



