II.

Among the existing stones in Wales with which the ancient ideas of
occult power are connected, one in Carmarthenshire is probably unique
of its kind. It is called Canna's Stone, and lies in a field adjoining
the old church of Llangan, now remote from the population whose
ancestors worshipped in it. The church was founded by an Armorican
lady of rank named Canna, who was sainted. The stone in question forms
a sort of chair, and was used in connection with a magic well called
Ffynon Canna, which is now, like the church, deserted and wretched.
Patients suffering from ague, in order to profit by its healing power,
must sit in the chair of Canna's stone, after drinking of the water.
If they could manage to sleep while in the chair, the effect of the
water was supposed to be made sure. The process was continued for some
days, sometimes for two or three weeks.

In the middle of this parish there is a field called Parc y Fonwent,
or the churchyard-field, where, according to local tradition, the
church was to have been originally built; but the stones brought to
the spot during the day were at night removed by invisible hands to
the site of the present church. Watchers in the dark heard the goblins
engaged in this work, and pronouncing in clear and correct Welsh these
words, 'Llangan, dyma'r fan,' which mean, 'Llangan, here is the spot.'

Similar miraculous removals of stones are reported and believed in
other parts of Wales. Sometimes visible goblins achieve the work;
sometimes the stones themselves possess the power of locomotion. The
old British historian Nennius[170] speaks of a stone, one of the
wonders of the Isle of Anglesea, which walks during the night in the
valley of Eitheinn. Being once thrown into the whirlpool Cerevus,
which is in the middle of the sea called Menai, it was on the morrow
found on the side of the aforesaid valley. Also in Builth is a heap of
stones, upon which is one stone bearing the impress of a dog's foot.
This was the famous dog of King Arthur, named Cabal, which left its
footprint on this stone when it hunted the swine Troynt. Arthur
himself gathered this heap of stones, with the magic stone upon it,
and called it Carn Cabal; and people who take away this stone in their
hands for the space of a day and a night cannot retain it, for it
returns itself to the heap. The Anglesea stone is also mentioned by
Giraldus, through whom it achieved celebrity under the name of Maen
Morddwyd, or the Thigh Stone--'a stone resembling a human thigh, which
possesses this innate virtue, that whatever distance it may be carried
it returns of its own accord the following night. Hugh, Earl of
Chester, in the reign of King Henry I., having by force occupied this
island and the adjacent country, heard of the miraculous power of this
stone, and for the purpose of trial ordered it to be fastened with
strong iron chains to one of a larger size and to be thrown into the
sea; on the following morning, however, according to custom, it was
found in its original position, on which account the Earl issued a
public edict that no one from that time should presume to move the
stone from its place. A countryman also, to try the powers of this
stone, fastened it to his thigh, which immediately became putrid, and
the stone returned to its original situation.'[171] This stone
ultimately lost its virtues, however, for it was stolen in the last
century and never came back.
