III.

The Talking Stone Llechlafar, or stone of loquacity, served as a
bridge over the river Alyn, bounding the churchyard of St. David's in
Pembrokeshire, on the northern side. It was a marble slab worn smooth
by the tread of many feet, and was ten feet long, six feet broad, and
one foot thick. Ancient tradition relates that one day 'when a corpse
was being carried over it for interment the stone broke forth into
speech, and by the effort cracked in the middle, which fissure is
still visible; and on account of this barbarous and ancient
superstition the corpses are no longer brought over it.'[172]

In this same parish of St. David's, there was a flight of steps
leading down to the sea, among which were a certain few which uttered
a miraculous sound, like the ringing of a bell. The story goes that in
ancient times a band of pirates landed there and robbed the chapel.
The bell they took away to sea with them, but as it was heavy they
rested it several times on their way, and ever since that day the
stones it rested upon have uttered these mysterious sounds when
struck.

Also in this parish is the renowned Expanding Stone, an excavation in
the rock of St. Gowan's chapel, which has the magic property of
adapting itself to the size of the person who gets into it, growing
smaller for a small man and larger for a large one. Among its many
virtues was that if a person got into it and made a wish, and did not
change his mind while turning about, the wish would come true. The
original fable relates that this hollow stone was once solid; that a
saint closely pursued by Pagan persecutors sought shelter of the rock,
which thereupon opened and received him, concealing him till the
danger was over and then obligingly letting him out.

This stone may probably be considered as the monkish parallel for the
magic stones which confer on their possessor invisibility, as we find
them in the romances of enchantment. In the 'Mabinogion' such stones
are frequently mentioned, usually in the favourite form of a gem set
within a ring. 'Take this ring,' says the damsel with yellow curling
hair,[173] 'and put it on thy finger, with the stone inside thy hand;
and close thy hand upon the stone. And as long as thou concealest it,
it will conceal thee.' But when it is found, as we find in following
these clues further, that this Stone of Invisibility was one of the
Thirteen Rarities of Kingly Regalia of the Island of Britain; that it
was formerly kept at Caerleon, in Monmouthshire, the city whence St.
David journeyed into Pembrokeshire; and that it is mentioned in the
Triads thus: 'The Stone of the Ring of Luned, which liberated Owen the
son of Urien from between the portcullis and the wall; whoever
concealed that stone the stone or bezel would conceal him,' the strong
probability appears that we are dealing with one and the same myth in
the tale of magic and in the monkish legend. Traced back to a period
more remote than that with which these Welsh stories ostensibly deal,
we should find their prototype in the ring of Gyges.

The Stone of Remembrance is another stone mentioned in the
'Mabinogion,' also a jewel, endowed with valuable properties which it
imparts not merely to its wearer, but to any one who looks upon it.
'Rhonabwy,' says Iddawc to the enchanted dreamer on the yellow
calf-skin, 'dost thou see the ring with a stone set in it, that is
upon the Emperor's hand?' 'I see it,' he answered. 'It is one of the
properties of that stone to enable thee to remember that thou seest
here to-night, and hadst thou not seen the stone, thou wouldst never
have been able to remember aught thereof.'[174] Still another stone of
rare good qualities is that which Peredur gave to Etlym, in reward for
his attendance,[175] the stone which was on the tail of a serpent, and
whose virtues were such that whosoever should hold it in one hand, in
the other he would have as much gold as he might desire. Peredur
having vanquished the serpent and possessed himself of the stone,
immediately gave it away, in that spirit of lavish free-handedness
which so commonly characterizes the heroes of chivalric British
romance.
