VII.

In every part of Wales one encounters the ancient memorials of King
Arthur--sometimes to be dimly connected with the historical character,
but more often with the mythical figure--each with its legend, or its
bundle of legends, poetic, patriotic, or superstitious. Arthur's Round
Table at Caerleon, Monmouthshire, is as well known to every boy in the
neighbourhood as any inn or shop of the village. It is a grass-grown
Roman amphitheatre, whence alabaster statues of Adrian's day have been
disinterred. There is also an Arthur's Round Table in Denbighshire, a
flat-topped hill thus called, and in Anglesea another, near the
village of Llanfihangel. Arthur's Seat, Arthur's Bed, Arthur's Castle,
Arthur's Stone, Arthur's Hill, Arthur's Quoit, Arthur's Board,
Arthur's Carn, Arthur's Pot--these are but a few of the well-known
cromlechs, rocking-stones, or natural objects to be found in various
neighbourhoods. They are often in duplicates, under these names, but
they never bear such titles by other authority than traditions
reaching back into the dark ages. Some of the stories and
superstitions which attach to them are striking, and of the most
fascinating interest to the student of folk-lore; others are merely
grotesque, as in the case of Arthur's Pot. This is under a cromlech at
Dolwillim, on the banks of the Tawe, and in the stream itself when the
water is high; it is a circular hole of considerable depth, accurately
bored in the stone by the action of the water. This hole is called
Arthur's Pot, and according to local belief was made by Merlin for
the hero king to cook his dinner in. Arthur's Quoits are found in many
parts of the country. A large rock in the bed of the Sawdde river, on
the Llangadock side of Mynydd Du, (the Black Mountain,) is one of
these quoits. The story is that the king one day flung it from the
summit of Pen Arthur, a mile away. There is another large rock beside
it, which was similarly flung down by a lady of Arthur's acquaintance,
whose gigantic proportions may be guessed from the fact that this
boulder was a pebble in her shoe, which annoyed her.

