V.

Pwca, or Pooka, is but another name for the Ellylldan, as our Puck is
another name for the Will-o'-wisp; but in both cases the shorter term
has a more poetic flavour and a wider latitude. The name Puck was
originally applied to the whole race of English fairies, and there
still be few of the realm who enjoy a wider popularity than Puck, in
spite of his mischievous attributes. Part of this popularity is due to
the poets, especially to Shakspeare. I have alluded to the bard's
accurate knowledge of Welsh folk-lore; the subject is really one of
unique interest, in view of the inaccuracy charged upon him as to the
English fairyland. There is a Welsh tradition to the effect that
Shakspeare received his knowledge of the Cambrian fairies from his
friend Richard Price, son of Sir John Price, of the priory of Brecon.
It is even claimed that Cwm Pwca, or Puck Valley, a part of the
romantic glen of the Clydach, in Breconshire, is the original scene of
the 'Midsummer Night's Dream'--a fancy as light and airy as Puck
himself.[16] Anyhow, there Cwm Pwca is, and in the sylvan days, before
Frere and Powell's ironworks were set up there, it is said to have
been as full of goblins as a Methodist's head is of piety. And there
are in Wales other places bearing like names, where Pwca's pranks are
well remembered by old inhabitants. The range given to the popular
fancy in Wales is expressed with fidelity by Shakspeare's words in the
mouth of Puck:

    I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round,
    Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier,
    Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
    A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
    And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
    Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.[17]

The various stories I have encountered bear out these details almost
without an omission.

  [Illustration: {SKETCH OF PWCA.}]

In his own proper character, however, Pwca has a sufficiently
grotesque elfish aspect. It is stated that a Welsh peasant who was
asked to give an idea of the appearance of Pwca, drew the above figure
with a bit of coal.

A servant girl who attended to the cattle on the Trwyn farm, near
Abergwyddon, used to take food to 'Master Pwca,' as she called the
elf. A bowl of fresh milk and a slice of white bread were the
component parts of the goblin's repast, and were placed on a certain
spot where he got them. One night the girl, moved by the spirit of
mischief, drank the milk and ate most of the bread, leaving for Master
Pwca only water and crusts. Next morning she found that the fastidious
fairy had left the food untouched. Not long after, as the girl was
passing the lonely spot, where she had hitherto left Pwca his food,
she was seized under the arm pits by fleshly hands (which, however,
she could not see), and subjected to a castigation of a most
mortifying character. Simultaneously there fell upon her ear in good
set Welsh a warning not to repeat her offence on peril of still worse
treatment. This story 'is thoroughly believed in there to this
day.'[18]

I visited the scene of the story, a farm near Abergwyddon (now called
Abercarne), and heard a great deal more of the exploits of that
particular Pwca, to which I will refer again. The most singular fact
of the matter is that although at least a century has elapsed, and
some say several centuries, since the exploits in question, you cannot
find a Welsh peasant in the parish but knows all about Pwca'r Trwyn.
