I.

Paleographic students are more or less familiar with about seventy
early inscribed stones in Wales. The value of these monuments, as
corroborative evidence of historical facts, in connection with waning
popular traditions, is well understood. Superstitious prejudice is
particularly active in connection with stones of this kind. The
peasantry view them askance, and will destroy them if not restrained,
as they usually are, by fear of evil results to themselves.
Antiquaries have often reason to thank superstition for the existence
in our day of these ancient monuments. But there is a sort of
progressive movement towards enlightenment which carries the Welsh
farmer from the fearsome to the destructive stage, in this connection.
That dangerous thing, a little knowledge, sometimes leads its imbiber
beyond the reach of all fear of the guardian fairy or demon of the
stone, yet leaves him still so superstitious regarding it that he
believes its influence to be baleful, and its destruction a sort of
duty. It was the common opinion of the peasantry of the parish in
which it stood, that whoever happened to read the inscription on the
Maen Llythyrog, an early inscribed stone on the top of a mountain near
Margam Abbey, in Glamorganshire, would die soon after. In many
instances the stones are believed to be transformed human beings,
doomed to this guise for some sin, usually an act of sacrilege.
Beliefs of this character would naturally be potent in influencing
popular feeling against the stones. But on the other hand, however
desirable might be their extinction, there would be perils involved,
which one would rather his neighbour than himself should encounter.
Various awful consequences, but especially the most terrific storms
and disturbances of the earth, followed any meddling with them.

At Banwan Bryddin, a few miles from Neath, a stone pillar inscribed
'MARCI CARITINI FILII BERICII,' long stood on a tumulus which by the
peasants was considered a fairy ring. The late Lady Mackworth caused
this stone to be removed to a grotto she was constructing on her
grounds, and which she was ornamenting with all the curious stones she
could collect. An old man who was an under-gardener on her estate, and
who abounded with tales of goblins, declaring he had often had
intercourse with these strange people, told the Rev. Mr. Williams of
Tir-y-Cwm, that he had always known this act of sacrilege would not go
unpunished by the guardians of the stone. He had more than once seen
these sprites dancing of an evening in the rings of Banwan Bryddin,
where the 'wonder stone' stood, but never since the day the stone was
removed had any mortal seen them. Upon the stone, he said, were
written mysterious words in the fairy language, which no one had ever
been able to comprehend, not even Lady Mackworth herself. When her
ladyship removed the stone to Gnoll Gardens the fairies were very
much annoyed; and the grotto, which cost Lady Mackworth thousands of
pounds to build, was no sooner finished than one night, Duw'n catwo
ni! there was such thunder and lightning as never was heard or seen in
Glamorganshire before; and next morning the grotto was gone! The hill
had fallen over it and hidden it for ever. 'Iss indeed,' said the old
man, 'and woe will fall on the Cymro or the Saeson that will dare to
clear the earth away. I myself, and others who was there, was hear the
fairies laughing loud that night, after the storm has cleared away.'

