III.

There is a curious legend regarding three stones which once stood on
the top of Moelfre Hill, in Carnarvonshire, but which were long ago
rolled to the bottom of the hill by 'some idle-headed youths' who dug
them up. They were each about four feet high, standing as the corners
of a triangle; one was red as blood, another white, and the third a
pale blue. The tradition says that three women, about the time when
Christianity first began to be known in Britain, went up Moelfre Hill
on a Sabbath morning to winnow their corn. They had spread their
winnowing sheet upon the ground and begun their work, when some of
their neighbours came to them and reprehended them for working on the
Lord's day. But the women, having a greater eye to their worldly
profit than to the observance of the fourth commandment, made light of
their neighbours' words, and went on working. Thereupon they were
instantly transformed into three pillars of stone, each stone of the
same colour as the dress of the woman in whose place it stood, one
red, one white, and the third bluish.

Legends of the turning to stone of human beings occur in connection
with many of the meini hirion (long stones). Near Llandyfrydog,
Anglesea, there is a maenhir of peculiar shape. From one point of view
it looks not unlike the figure of a humpbacked man, and it is called
'Carreg y Lleidr,' or the Robber's Stone. The tradition connected with
it is that a man who had stolen the church Bible, and was carrying it
away on his shoulder, was turned into this stone, and must stand here
till the last trump sets him free.

At Rolldritch (Rhwyldrech?) there is or was a circle of stones,
concerning which tradition held that they were the human victims of a
witch who, for some offence, transformed them to this shape. In
connection with this circle is preserved another form of superstitious
belief very often encountered, namely, that the number of stones in
the circle cannot be correctly counted by a mortal.[178]

It is noteworthy that the only creature which shares with man the grim
fate of being turned to stone, in Welsh legends, is the serpent. The
monkish account of St. Ceyna, one of the daughters of Prince Brychan,
of Breconshire, relates that having consecrated her virginity to the
Lord by a perpetual vow, she resolved to seek some desert place where
she could give herself wholly up to meditation. So she journeyed
beyond the river Severn, 'and there meeting a woody place, she made
her request to the prince of that country that she might be permitted
to serve God in that solitude. His answer was that he was very willing
to grant her request, but that the place did so swarm with serpents
that neither man nor beast could inhabit it. But she replied that her
firm trust was in the name and assistance of Almighty God to drive all
that poisonous brood out of that region. Hereupon the place was
granted to the holy virgin, who, prostrating herself before God,
obtained of him to change the serpents and vipers into stones. And to
this day the stones in that region do resemble the windings of
serpents, through all the fields and villages, as if they had been
framed by the hand of the sculptor.' The scene of this legend is
mentioned by Camden as being at a place near Bristol, called Keynsham,
'where abundance of that fossil called by the naturalists Cornu
Ammonis is dug up.'

FOOTNOTE:

[178] Roberts, 'Camb. Pop. Ant.,' 220.

