I.

In the prominent part played by storm--torrents of rain, blinding
lightning, deafening thunder--in legends of disturbed cromlechs, and
other awful stones, is involved the ancient belief that these elements
were themselves baleful spirits, which could be evoked by certain
acts. They were in the service of fiends and fairies, and came at
their bidding to avenge the intrusion of venturesome mortals, daring
to meddle with sacred things. This fascinating superstition is
preserved in numberless Welsh legends relating to hidden treasures,
buried under cromlechs or rocky mounds, or in caverns. In the
'Mabinogion' it appears in the enchanted barrier to the Castle of the
Lady of the Fountain. Under a certain tall tree in the midst of a wide
valley there was a fountain, 'and by the side of the fountain a marble
slab, and on the marble slab a silver bowl, attached by a chain of
silver, so that it may not be carried away. Take the bowl and throw a
bowlful of water on the slab,' says the black giant of the wood to
Sir Kai, 'and thou wilt hear a mighty peal of thunder, so that thou
wilt think that heaven and earth are trembling with its fury. With the
thunder there will come a shower so severe that it will be scarce
possible for thee to endure it and live. And the shower will be of
hailstones; and after the shower the weather will become fair, but
every leaf that was upon the tree will have been carried away by the
shower.'[183] Of course the knight dares this awful obstacle, throws
the bowlful of water upon the slab, receives the terrible storm upon
his shield, and fights the knight who owned the fountain, on his
coming forth. Sir Kai is worsted, and returns home to Arthur's court;
whereupon Sir Owain takes up the contest. He sallies forth, evokes the
storm, encounters the black knight, slays him, and becomes master of
all that was his--his castle, his lands, his wife, and all his
treasures.

The peasant of to-day who sets out in quest of hidden treasures evokes
the avenging storm in like manner. Sometimes the treasure is in the
ground, under a cromlech or a carn; he digs, and the thunder shakes
the air, the lightnings flash, torrents descend, and he is frustrated
in his search. Again, the treasure is in a cavern, guarded by a
dragon, which belches forth fire upon him and scorches his eyeballs.
Welsh folk-lore is full of legends of this character; and the curious
way in which science and religion sometimes get mixed up with these
superstitions is most suggestive--as in the cases of the falling of
Coychurch tower, and the Red Lady of Paviland. The latter is the name
given a skeleton found by Dr. Buckland in his exploration of the
Paviland caves, the bones of which were stained by red oxide of iron.
The vulgar belief is that the Red Lady was entombed in the cave by a
storm while seeking treasure there--a legend the truth of which no one
can dispute with authority, since the bones are certainly of a period
contemporary with the Roman rule in this island. Coins of Constantine
were found in the same earth, cemented with fragments of charcoal and
bone ornaments. In the case of Coychurch tower, it undoubtedly fell
because it was undermined by a contractor who had the job of removing
certain defunct forefathers from their graves near its base. Some
eighteen hundred skulls were taken from the ground and carted off to a
hole on the east side of the church. But the country folk pooh-pooh
the idea that the tower fell for any reason other than sheer
indignation and horror at the disturbance of this hallowed ground by
utilitarian pickaxe and spade. They call your attention to the fact
that not only did the venerable tower come crashing down, after having
stood for centuries erect, but that in falling it struck to the earth
St. Crallo's cross--an upright stone in the churchyard as venerable as
itself--breaking it all to pieces.

FOOTNOTE:

[183] 'Mabinogion,' 8.

