VI.

In the legend of Castell Coch, instead of a raven it is a pair of huge
eagles which watch the treasure. Castell Coch is an easy and pleasant
two hours' walk from Cardiff Castle, with which it is vulgarly
believed to be connected by a subterranean passage. A short time
ago--well, to be precise, a hundred years ago, but that is no time at
all in the history of Castell Coch, which was a crumbling ruin then as
it is now[186]--in or about the year 1780, a reduced lady was allowed
to fit up three or four rooms in the ruin as a residence, and to live
there with two old servants of her house. One night this lady was
awakened from her sleep to receive the visit of a venerable ghost in
a full dress-suit of an earlier century, who distressed her by his
troubled countenance and vexed her by his eccentric behaviour, for
when she spoke to him from the depths of her nightcap he at once got
through the wall. He came on subsequent nights so often, and
frightened the servants so much by the noise he made--in getting
through the wall, of course--that the lady gave up her strange abode,
and was glad to pay house rent ever after in other parts. This old
ghost was in the flesh proprietor of the castle, it appears, and
during the civil wars buried an iron chest full of gold in the
subterranean passage--which is still there, guarded by two large
eagles. A party of gentlemen who somewhere about 1800 attempted to
explore the passage saw the eagles, and were attacked by the birds of
freedom so fiercely that they retreated in disorder. Subsequently they
returned with pistols and shot the eagles, which resented this
trifling impertinence by tearing the treasure-seekers in a shocking
manner. After having recovered from their wounds, the determined
Welshmen renewed the attack--this time with silver bullets, which they
had got blessed by a good-natured priest. The bullets rattled
harmlessly on the feathers of the terrible birds; the ground shook
under foot; rain descended in torrents; with their great wings the
eagles beat out the gold-hunters' torches, and they barely escaped
with their lives.

FOOTNOTE:

[186] It is at present being entirely restored and made habitable by
its owner, Lord Bute.

