IX.

The Coblynau are always given the form of dwarfs, in the popular
fancy; wherever seen or heard, they are believed to have escaped from
the mines or the secret regions of the mountains. Their homes are
hidden from mortal vision. When encountered, either in the mines or on
the mountains, they have strayed from their special abodes, which are
as spectral as themselves. There is at least one account extant of
their secret territory having been revealed to mortal eyes. I find it
in a quaint volume (of which I shall have more to say), printed at
Newport, Monmouthshire, in 1813.[19] It relates that one William
Evans, of Hafodafel, while crossing the Beacon Mountain very early in
the morning, passed a fairy coal mine, where fairies were busily at
work. Some were cutting the coal, some carrying it to fill the sacks,
some raising the loads upon the horses' backs, and so on; but all in
the completest silence. He thought this 'a wonderful extra natural
thing,' and was considerably impressed by it, for well he knew that
there really was no coal mine at that place. He was a person of
'undoubted veracity,' and what is more, 'a great man in the
world--above telling an untruth.'

That the Coblynau sometimes wandered far from home, the same
chronicler testifies; but on these occasions they were taking a
holiday. Egbert Williams, 'a pious young gentleman of Denbighshire,
then at school,' was one day playing in a field called Cae Caled, in
the parish of Bodfari, with three girls, one of whom was his sister.
Near the stile beyond Lanelwyd House they saw a company of fifteen or
sixteen coblynau engaged in dancing madly. They were in the middle of
the field, about seventy yards from the spectators, and they danced
something after the manner of Morris-dancers, but with a wildness and
swiftness in their motions. They were clothed in red like British
soldiers, and wore red handkerchiefs spotted with yellow wound round
their heads. And a strange circumstance about them was that although
they were almost as big as ordinary men, yet they had unmistakably the
appearance of dwarfs, and one could call them nothing but dwarfs.
Presently one of them left the company and ran towards the group near
the stile, who were direfully scared thereby, and scrambled in great
fright to go over the stile. Barbara Jones got over first, then her
sister, and as Egbert Williams was helping his sister over they saw
the coblyn close upon them, and barely got over when his hairy hand
was laid on the stile. He stood leaning on it, gazing after them as
they ran, with a grim copper-coloured countenance and a fierce look.
The young people ran to Lanelwyd House and called the elders out, but
though they hurried quickly to the field the dwarfs had already
disappeared.

FOOTNOTE:

[19] 'A Relation of Apparitions of Spirits in the County of Monmouth
and the Principality of Wales.' By Rev. Edmund Jones of the Tranch.
(Newport, 1813.)

