XII.

The same confusion in outlines which exists regarding our own Bogie
and Hobgoblin gives the Bwbach a double character, as a household
fairy and as a terrifying phantom. In both aspects it is ludicrous,
but in the latter it has dangerous practices. To get into its clutches
under certain circumstances is no trifling matter, for it has the
power of whisking people off through the air. Its services are brought
into requisition for this purpose by troubled ghosts who cannot sleep
on account of hidden treasure they want removed; and if they can
succeed in getting a mortal to help them in removing the treasure,
they employ the Bwbach to transport the mortal through the air.

This ludicrous fairy is in France represented by the gobelin. Mothers
threaten children with him. 'Le gobelin vous mangera, le gobelin vous
emportera.'[21] In the English 'hobgoblin' we have a word apparently
derived from the Welsh hob, to hop, and coblyn, a goblin, which
presents a hopping goblin to the mind, and suggests the Pwca (with
which the Bwbach is also confused in the popular fancy at times), but
should mean in English simply the goblin of the hob, or household
fairy. In its bugbear aspect, the Bwbach, like the English bogie, is
believed to be identical with the Slavonic 'bog,' and the 'baga' of
the Cuneiform Inscriptions, both of which are names for the Supreme
Being, according to Professor Fiske. 'The ancestral form of these
epithets' is found in 'the old Aryan "Bhaga," which reappears
unchanged in the Sanskrit of the Vedas, and has left a memento of
itself in the surname of the Phrygian Zeus "Bagaios." It seems
originally to have denoted either the unclouded sun, or the sky of
noonday illuminated by the solar rays.... Thus the same name which to
the Vedic poet, to the Persian of the time of Xerxes, and to the
modern Russian, suggests the supreme majesty of deity, is in English
associated with an ugly and ludicrous fiend, closely akin to that
grotesque Northern Devil of whom Southey was unable to think without
laughing.'[22]
