IX.

As the mermaid superstition is seemingly absent in Wales, so there are
no fairy tales of maidens who lure mortals to their doom beneath the
water, as the Dracæ did women and children, and as the Nymph of the
Lurley did marriageable young men. But it is believed that there are
several old Welsh families who are the descendants of the Gwragedd
Annwn, as in the case of the Meddygon Myddfai. The familiar Welsh name
of Morgan is sometimes thought to signify, 'Born of the Sea.'
Certainly môr in Welsh means sea, and gân a birth. It is curious,
too, that a mermaid is called in Basse Bretagne 'Mary Morgan.' But the
class of stories in which a mortal marries a water-maiden is large,
and while the local details smack of the soil, the general idea is so
like in lands far remote from each other as to indicate a common
origin in pre-historic times. In Wales, where the mountain lakes are
numerous, gloomy, lonely, and yet lovely; where many of them, too,
show traces of having been inhabited in ancient times by a race of
lake-dwellers, whose pile-supported villages vanished ages ago; and
where bread and cheese are as classic as beer and candles, these
particulars are localized in the legend. In the Faro Islands, where
the seal is a familiar yet ever-mysterious object, with its human-like
eyes, and glossy skin, the wife of supernatural race is a transformed
seal. She comes ashore every ninth night, sheds her skin, leaves it on
the shore, and dances with her fairy companions. A mortal steals her
sealskin dress, and when day breaks, and her companions return to
their abode in the sea, compels her to remain and be his wife. Some
day he offends her; she recovers her skin and plunges into the sea. In
China, the superstition appears in a Lew-chewan legend mentioned by
Dr. Dennys,[30] which relates how a fairy in the guise of a beautiful
woman is found bathing in a man's well. He persuades her to marry him,
and she remains with him for nine years, at the end of which time,
despite the affection she has for their two children, she 'glides
upwards into a cloud' and disappears.

FOOTNOTE:

[30] 'Folk-Lore of China,' 99.



