I.

The Gwyllion are female fairies of frightful characteristics, who
haunt lonely roads in the Welsh mountains, and lead night-wanderers
astray. They partake somewhat of the aspect of the Hecate of Greek
mythology, who rode on the storm, and was a hag of horrid guise. The
Welsh word gwyll is variously used to signify gloom, shade, duskiness,
a hag, a witch, a fairy, and a goblin; but its special application is
to these mountain fairies of gloomy and harmful habits, as distinct
from the Ellyllon of the forest glades and dingles, which are more
often beneficent. The Gwyllion take on a more distinct individuality
under another name--as the Ellyllon do in mischievous Puck--and the
Old Woman of the Mountain typifies all her kind. She is very carefully
described by the Prophet Jones,[31] in the guise in which she haunted
Llanhiddel Mountain in Monmouthshire. This was the semblance of a poor
old woman, with an oblong four-cornered hat, ash-coloured clothes, her
apron thrown across her shoulder, with a pot or wooden can in her
hand, such as poor people carry to fetch milk with, always going
before the spectator, and sometimes crying 'Wow up!' This is an
English form of a Welsh cry of distress, 'Wwb!' or 'Ww-bwb!'[32]
Those who saw this apparition, whether by night or on a misty day,
would be sure to lose their way, though they might be perfectly
familiar with the road. Sometimes they heard her cry, 'Wow up!' when
they did not see her. Sometimes when they went out by night, to fetch
coal, water, etc., the dwellers near that mountain would hear the cry
very close to them, and immediately after they would hear it afar off,
as if it were on the opposite mountain, in the parish of Aberystruth.
The popular tradition in that district was that the Old Woman of the
Mountain was the spirit of one Juan White, who lived time out of mind
in those parts, and was thought to be a witch; because the mountains
were not haunted in this manner until after Juan White's death.[33]
When people first lost their way, and saw her before them, they used
to hurry forward and try to catch her, supposing her to be a
flesh-and-blood woman, who could set them right; but they never could
overtake her, and she on her part never looked back; so that no man
ever saw her face. She has also been seen in the Black Mountain in
Breconshire. Robert Williams, of Langattock, Crickhowel, 'a
substantial man and of undoubted veracity,' tells this tale: As he was
travelling one night over part of the Black Mountain, he saw the Old
Woman, and at the same time found he had lost his way. Not knowing her
to be a spectre he hallooed to her to stay for him, but receiving no
answer thought she was deaf. He then hastened his steps, thinking to
overtake her, but the faster he ran the further he found himself
behind her, at which he wondered very much, not knowing the reason of
it. He presently found himself stumbling in a marsh, at which
discovery his vexation increased; and then he heard the Old Woman
laughing at him with a weird, uncanny, crackling old laugh. This set
him to thinking she might be a gwyll; and when he happened to draw out
his knife for some purpose, and the Old Woman vanished, then he was
sure of it; for Welsh ghosts and fairies are afraid of a knife.
