III.

The exorcism by knife appears to be a Welsh notion; though there is an
old superstition of wide prevalence in Europe that to give to or
receive from a friend a knife or a pair of scissors cuts friendship. I
have even encountered this superstition in America; once an editorial
friend at Indianapolis gave me a very handsome pocket-knife, which he
refused to part with except at the price of one cent, lawful coin of
the realm, asserting that we should become enemies without this
precaution. In China, too, special charms are associated with knives,
and a knife which has slain a fellow-being is an invaluable
possession. In Wales, according to Jones, the Gwyllion often came into
the houses of the people at Aberystruth, especially in stormy weather,
and the inmates made them welcome--not through any love they bore
them, but through fear of the hurts the Gwyllion might inflict if
offended--by providing clean water for them, and taking especial care
that no knife, or other cutting tool, should be in the corner near the
fire, where the fairies would go to sit. 'For want of which care many
were hurt by them.' While it was desirable to exorcise them when in
the open air, it was not deemed prudent to display an inhospitable
spirit towards any member of the fairy world. The cases of successful
exorcism by knife are many, and nothing in the realm of faerie is
better authenticated. There was Evan Thomas, who, travelling by night
over Bedwellty Mountain, towards the valley of Ebwy Fawr, where his
house and estate were, saw the Gwyllion on each side of him, some of
them dancing around him in fantastic fashion. He also heard the sound
of a bugle-horn winding in the air, and there seemed to be invisible
hunters riding by. He then began to be afraid, but recollected his
having heard that any person seeing Gwyllion may drive them away by
drawing out a knife. So he drew out his knife, and the fairies
vanished directly. Now Evan Thomas was 'an old gentleman of such
strict veracity that he' on one occasion 'did confess a truth against
himself,' when he was 'like to suffer loss' thereby, and
notwithstanding he 'was persuaded by some not to do it, yet he would
persist in telling the truth, to his own hurt.'

Should we find, in tracing these notions back to their source, that
they are connected with Arthur's sword Excalibur? If so, there again
we touch the primeval world.

Jones says that the Old Woman of the Mountain has, since about 1800,
(at least in South Wales,) been driven into close quarters by the
light of the Gospel--in fact, that she now haunts mines--or in the
preacher's formal words, 'the coal-pits and holes of the earth.'

