III.

I have encountered this tale frequently among the Welsh, and it always
keeps in the main the likeness of M. Villemarqué's story. The
following is a nearly literal version as related in Radnorshire (an
adjoining county to Montgomeryshire), and which, like most of these
tales, is characterised by the non-primitive tendency to give names of
localities: 'In the parish of Trefeglwys, near Llanidloes, in the
county of Montgomery, there is a little shepherd's cot that is
commonly called the Place of Strife, on account of the extraordinary
strife that has been there. The inhabitants of the cottage were a man
and his wife, and they had born to them twins, whom the woman nursed
with great care and tenderness. Some months after, indispensable
business called the wife to the house of one of her nearest
neighbours, yet notwithstanding that she had not far to go, she did
not like to leave her children by themselves in their cradle, even for
a minute, as her house was solitary, and there were many tales of
goblins, or the Tylwyth Teg, haunting the neighbourhood. However, she
went and returned as soon as she could;' but on her way back she was
'not a little terrified at seeing, though it was midday, some of the
old elves of the blue petticoat.' She hastened home in great
apprehension; but all was as she had left it, so that her mind was
greatly relieved. 'But after some time had passed by, the good people
began to wonder that the twins did not grow at all, but still
continued little dwarfs. The man would have it that they were not his
children; the woman said they must be their children, and about this
arose the great strife between them that gave name to the place. One
evening when the woman was very heavy of heart, she determined to go
and consult a conjuror, feeling assured that everything was known to
him.... Now there was to be a harvest soon of the rye and oats, so the
wise man said to her, "When you are preparing dinner for the reapers,
empty the shell of a hen's egg, and boil the shell full of pottage,
and take it out through the door as if you meant it for a dinner to
the reapers, and then listen what the twins will say; if you hear the
children speaking things above the understanding of children, return
into the house, take them and throw them into the waves of Llyn Ebyr,
which is very near to you; but if you don't hear anything remarkable
do them no injury." And when the day of the reaping came, the woman
did as her adviser had recommended to her; and as she went outside the
door to listen she heard one of the children say to the other:

    Gwelais fesen cyn gweled derwen;
    Gwelais wy cyn gweled iâr;
    Erioed ni welais ferwi bwyd i fedel
    Mewn plisgyn wy iâr!

    Acorns before oak I knew;
    An egg before a hen;
    Never one hen's egg-shell stew
    Enough for harvest men!

'On this the mother returned to her house and took the two children
and threw them into the Llyn; and suddenly the goblins in their blue
trousers came to save their dwarfs, and the mother had her own
children back again; and thus the strife between her and her husband
ended.'[35]

FOOTNOTE:

[35] 'Cambrian Quarterly,' ii., 86.

