V.

The Welsh fairies have several times been detected in the act of
carrying off a child; and in these cases, if the mother has been
sufficiently energetic in her objections, they have been forced to
abandon their purpose. Dazzy Walter, the wife of Abel Walter, of Ebwy
Fawr, one night in her husband's absence awoke in her bed and found
her baby was not at her side. In great fright she sought for it, and
caught it with her hand upon the boards above the bed, which was as
far as the fairies had succeeded in carrying it. And Jennet Francis,
of that same valley of Ebwy Fawr, one night in bed felt her infant son
being taken from her arms; whereupon she screamed and hung on, and, as
she phrased it, 'God and me were too hard for them.' This son
subsequently grew up and became a famous preacher of the gospel.

  [Illustration: JENNET FRANCIS STRUGGLES WITH THE FAIRIES FOR
      HER BABY.]

There are special exorcisms and preventive measures to interfere with
the fairies in their quest of infants. The most significant of these,
throughout Cambria, is a general habit of piety. Any pious
exclamation has value as an exorcism; but it will not serve as a
preventive. To this end you must put a knife in the child's cradle
when you leave it alone, or you must lay a pair of tongs across the
cradle. But the best preventive is baptism; it is usually the
unbaptised infant that is stolen. So in Friesland, Germany, it is
considered a protection against the fairies who deal in changelings,
to lay a Bible under the child's pillow. In Thuringia it is deemed an
infallible preventive to hang the father's breeches against the wall.
Anything more trivial than this, as a matter for the consideration of
grave and scholarly men, one could hardly imagine; but it is in
precisely these trivial or seemingly trivial details that the student
of comparative folk-lore finds his most extraordinary indices. Such a
superstition in isolation would suggest nothing; but it is found again
in Scotland,[37] and other countries, including China, where 'a pair
of the trousers of the child's father are put on the frame of the
bedstead in such a way that the waist shall hang downward or be lower
than the legs. On the trousers is stuck a piece of red paper, having
four words written upon it intimating that all unfavourable influences
are to go into the trousers instead of afflicting the babe.'[38]
