I.

Closely akin to the subject of changelings is that of adults or
well-grown children being led away to live with the Tylwyth Teg. In
this field the Welsh traditions are innumerable, and deal not only
with the last century or two, but distinctly with the middle ages.
Famed among British goblins are those fairies which are immortalised
in the Tale of Elidurus. This tale was written in Latin by Giraldus
Cambrensis (as he called himself, after the pedantic fashion of his
day), a Welshman, born at Pembroke Castle, and a hearty admirer of
everything Welsh, himself included. He was beyond doubt a man of
genius, and of profound learning. In 1188 he made a tour through
Wales, in the interest of the crusade then in contemplation, and
afterwards wrote his book--a fascinating picture of manners and
customs in Wales in the twelfth century.

The scene of the tale is that Vale of Neath, already named as a famous
centre of fairyland. Elidurus, when a youth of twelve years, 'in order
to avoid the severity of his preceptor,' ran away from school, 'and
concealed himself under the hollow bank of a river.' After he had
fasted in that situation for two days, 'two little men of pigmy
stature appeared to him,' and said, 'If you will go with us, we will
lead you into a country full of delights and sports.' Assenting,
Elidurus rose up and 'followed his guides through a path at first
subterraneous and dark, into a most beautiful country, but obscure and
not illuminated with the full light of the sun.' All the days in that
country 'were cloudy, and the nights extremely dark.' The boy was
brought before the king of the strange little people, and introduced
to him in the presence of his Court. Having examined Elidurus for a
long time, the king delivered him to his son, that prince being then a
boy. The men of this country, though of the smallest stature, were
very well proportioned, fair-complexioned, and wore long hair. 'They
had horses and greyhounds adapted to their size. They neither ate
flesh nor fish, but lived on milk-diet, made up into messes with
saffron. As often as they returned from our hemisphere, they
reprobated our ambition, infidelities, and inconstancies; and though
they had no form of public worship, were, it seems, strict lovers and
reverers of truth. The boy frequently returned to our hemisphere,
sometimes by the way he had gone, sometimes by others; at first in
company, and afterwards alone; and made himself known only to his
mother, to whom he described what he had seen. Being desired by her to
bring her a present of gold, with which that country abounded, he
stole, whilst at play with the king's son, a golden ball with which he
used to divert himself, and brought it in haste to his mother, but not
unpursued; for, as he entered the house of his father, he stumbled at
the threshold;' the ball fell, 'and two pigmies seizing it, departed,
showing the boy every mark of contempt and derision. Notwithstanding
every attempt for the space of a year, he never again could find the
track to the subterraneous passage.' He had made himself acquainted
with the language of his late hosts, 'which was very conformable to
the Greek idiom. When they asked for water, they said _Udor udorum_;
when they want salt, they say _Halgein udorum_.'[39]

FOOTNOTE:

[39] See Sir R. C. Hoare's Translation of Giraldus.

