II.

Exactly similar to this medieval legend in spirit, although differing
widely in detail, is the modern story of Shuï Rhys, told to me by a
peasant in Cardiganshire. Shuï was a beautiful girl of seventeen, tall
and fair, with a skin like ivory, hair black and curling, and eyes of
dark velvet. She was but a poor farmer's daughter, notwithstanding her
beauty, and among her duties was that of driving up the cows for the
milking. Over this work she used to loiter sadly, to pick flowers by
the way, or chase the butterflies, or amuse herself in any agreeable
manner that fortune offered. For her loitering she was often chided;
indeed, people said Shuï's mother was far too sharp with the girl, and
that it was for no good the mother had so bitter a tongue. After all
the girl meant no harm, they said. But when one night Shuï never came
home till bed-time, leaving the cows to care for themselves, dame Rhys
took the girl to task as she never had done before. 'Ysgwaetheroedd,
mami,' said Shuï, 'I couldn't help it; it was the Tylwyth Teg.' The
dame was aghast at this, but she could not answer it--for well she
knew the Tylwyth Teg were often seen in the woods of Cardigan. Shuï
was at first shy about talking of the fairies, but finally confessed
they were little men in green coats, who danced around her and made
music on their tiny harps; and they talked to her in language too
beautiful to be repeated; indeed she couldn't understand the words,
though she knew well enough what the fairies meant. Many a time after
that Shuï was late; but now nobody chided her, for fear of offending
the fairies. At last one night Shuï did not come home at all. In alarm
the woods were searched; there was no sign of her; and never was she
seen in Cardigan again. Her mother watched in the fields on the
Teir-nos Ysprydion, or three nights of the year when goblins are sure
to be abroad; but Shuï never returned. Once indeed there came back to
the neighbourhood a wild rumour that Shuï Rhys had been seen in a
great city in a foreign land--Paris, perhaps, or London, who knows?
but this tale was in no way injurious to the sad belief that the
fairies had carried her off; they might take her to those well-known
centres of idle and sinful pleasure, as well as to any other place.

  [Illustration: SHUÏ RHYS AND THE TYLWYTH TEG.]

