V.

In the great majority of these stories the hero dies immediately after
his release from the thraldom of the fairies--in some cases with a
suddenness and a completeness of obliteration as appalling as
dramatic. The following story, well known in Carmarthenshire, presents
this detail with much force: There was a certain farmer who, while
going early one morning to fetch his horses from the pasture, heard
harps playing. Looking carefully about for the source of this music,
he presently saw a company of Tylwyth Teg footing it merrily in a
corelw. Resolving to join their dance and cultivate their
acquaintance, the farmer stepped into the fairy ring. Never had man
his resolution more thoroughly carried out, for having once begun the
reel he was not allowed to finish it till years had elapsed. Even then
he might not have been released, had it not chanced that a man one day
passed by the lonely spot, so close to the ring that he saw the farmer
dancing. 'Duw catto ni!' cried the man, 'God save us! but this is a
merry one. Hai, holo! man, what, in Heaven's name, makes you so
lively?' This question, in which the name of Heaven was uttered, broke
the spell which rested on the farmer, who spoke like one in a dream:
'O dyn!' cried he, 'what's become of the horses?' Then he stepped from
the fairy circle and instantly crumbled away and mingled his dust with
the earth.

A similar tale is told in Carnarvon, but with the fairy dance omitted
and a pious character substituted, which helps to indicate the
antiquity of this class of legend, by showing that it was one of the
monkish adoptions of an earlier story. Near Clynog, in Carnarvonshire,
there is a place called Llwyn y Nef, (the Bush of Heaven,) which thus
received its name: In Clynog lived a monk of most devout life, who
longed to be taken to heaven. One evening, whilst walking without the
monastery by the riverside, he sat down under a green tree and fell
into a deep reverie, which ended in sleep; and he slept for thousands
of years. At last he heard a voice calling unto him, 'Sleeper, awake
and be up.' He awoke. All was strange to him except the old monastery,
which still looked down upon the river. He went to the monastery, and
was made much of. He asked for a bed to rest himself on and got it.
Next morning when the brethren sought him, they found nothing in the
bed but a handful of ashes.[40]

So in the monkish tale of the five saints, who sleep in the cave of
Caio, reappears the legend of Arthur's sleeping warriors under
Craig-y-Ddinas.

FOOTNOTE:

[40] 'Cymru Fu,' 188.

