VII.

Taffy ap Sion, the shoemaker's son, living near Pencader,
Carmarthenshire, was a lad who many years ago entered the fairy circle
on the mountain hard by there, and having danced a few minutes, as he
supposed, chanced to step out. He was then astonished to find that the
scene which had been so familiar was now quite strange to him. Here
were roads and houses he had never seen, and in place of his father's
humble cottage there now stood a fine stone farm-house. About him were
lovely cultivated fields instead of the barren mountain he was
accustomed to. 'Ah,' thought he, 'this is some fairy trick to deceive
my eyes. It is not ten minutes since I stepped into that circle, and
now when I step out they have built my father a new house! Well, I only
hope it is real; anyhow, I'll go and see.' So he started off by a path
he knew instinctively, and suddenly struck against a very solid hedge.
He rubbed his eyes, felt the hedge with his fingers, scratched his
head, felt the hedge again, ran a thorn into his fingers and cried out,
'Wbwb! this is no fairy hedge anyhow, nor, from the age of the thorns,
was it grown in a few minutes' time.' So he climbed over it and walked
on. 'Here was I born,' said he, as he entered the farmyard, staring
wildly about him, 'and not a thing here do I know!' His mystification
was complete when there came bounding towards him a huge dog, barking
furiously. 'What dog is this? Get out, you ugly brute! Don't you know
I'm master here?--at least, when mother's from home, for father don't
count.' But the dog only barked the harder. 'Surely,' muttered Taffy to
himself, 'I have lost my road and am wandering through some unknown
neighbourhood; but no, yonder is the Careg Hir!' and he stood staring
at the well-known erect stone thus called, which still stands on the
mountain south of Pencader, and is supposed to have been placed there
in ancient times to commemorate a victory. As Taffy stood thus looking
at the Long Stone, he heard footsteps behind him, and turning, beheld
the occupant of the farm-house, who had come out to see why his dog was
barking. Poor Taffy was so ragged and wan that the farmer's Welsh heart
was at once stirred to sympathy. 'Who are you, poor man?' he asked. To
which Taffy answered, 'I know who I was, but I do not know who I _am
now_. I was the son of a shoemaker who lived in this place, this
morning; for that rock, though it is changed a little, I know too
well.' 'Poor fellow,' said the farmer, 'you have lost your senses. This
house was built by my great-grandfather, repaired by my grandfather;
and that part there, which seems newly built, was done about three
years ago at my expense. You must be deranged, or have missed the road;
but come in and refresh yourself with some victuals, and rest.' Taffy
was half persuaded that he had overslept himself and lost his road, but
looking back he saw the rock before mentioned, and exclaimed, 'It is
but an hour since I was on yonder rock robbing a hawk's nest.' 'Where
have you been since?' Taffy related his adventure. 'Ah,' quoth the
farmer, 'I see how it is--you have been with the fairies. Pray, who was
your father?' 'Sion Evan y Crydd o Glanrhyd,' was the answer. 'I never
heard of such a man,' said the farmer, shaking his head, 'nor of such a
place as Glanrhyd, either: but no matter, after you have taken a little
food we will step down to Catti Shon, at Pencader, who will probably be
able to tell us something.' With this he beckoned Taffy to follow him,
and walked on; but hearing behind him the sound of footsteps growing
weaker and weaker, he turned round, when to his horror he beheld the
poor fellow crumble in an instant to about a thimbleful of black ashes.
The farmer, though much terrified at this sight, preserved his calmness
sufficiently to go at once and see old Catti, the aged crone he had
referred to, who lived at Pencader, near by. He found her crouching
over a fire of faggots, trying to warm her old bones. 'And how do you
do the day, Catti Shon?' asked the farmer. 'Ah,' said old Catti, 'I'm
wonderful well, farmer, considering how old I am.' 'Yes, yes, you're
very old. Now, since you are so old, let me ask you--do you remember
anything about Sion y Crydd o Glanrhyd? Was there ever such a man, do
you know?' 'Sion Glanrhyd? O! I have some faint recollection of hearing
my grandfather, old Evan Shenkin, Penferdir, relate that Sion's son was
lost one morning, and they never heard of him afterwards, so that it
was said he was taken by the fairies. His father's cot stood somewhere
near your house.' 'Were there many fairies about at that time?' asked
the farmer. 'O yes; they were often seen on yonder hill, and I was told
they were lately seen in Pant Shon Shenkin, eating flummery out of
egg-shells, which they had stolen from a farm hard by.' 'Dir anwyl fi!'
cried the farmer; 'dear me! I recollect now--I saw them myself!'

Pant Shon[41] Shenkin, it must be here remarked, was a famous place
for the Carmarthenshire fairies. The traditions thereabout respecting
them are numerous. Among the strangest is, that a woman once actually
caught a fairy on the mountain near Pant Shon Shenkin, and that it
remained long in her custody, retaining still the same height and
size, but at last made its escape.

Another curious tradition relates that early one Easter Monday, when
the parishioners of Pencarreg and Caio were met to play at football,
they saw a numerous company of Tylwyth Teg dancing. Being so many in
number, the young men were not intimidated at all, but proceeded in a
body towards the puny tribe, who, perceiving them, removed to another
place. The young men followed, whereupon the little folks suddenly
appeared dancing at the first place. Seeing this, the men divided and
surrounded them, when they immediately became invisible, and were
never more seen there.

FOOTNOTE:

[41] Sion and Shon are the same word, just as are our Smith and Smyth.
Where there are so few personal names as in Wales, while I would not
myself change a single letter in order to render the actors in a tale
more distinct, it is perhaps as well to encourage any eccentricities
of spelling which we are so lucky as to find on the spot.

