VIII.

Ignorance of what transpired in the fairy circle is not an invariable
feature of legends like those we have been observing. In the story of
Tudur of Llangollen, preserved by several old Welsh writers, the
hero's experiences are given with much liveliness of detail. The scene
of this tale is a hollow near Llangollen, on the mountain side
half-way up to the ruins of Dinas Bran Castle, which hollow is to this
day called Nant yr Ellyllon. It obtained its name, according to
tradition, in this wise: A young man, called Tudur ap Einion Gloff,
used in old times to pasture his master's sheep in that hollow. One
summer's night, when Tudur was preparing to return to the lowlands
with his woolly charge, there suddenly appeared, perched upon a stone
near him, 'a little man in moss breeches with a fiddle under his arm.
He was the tiniest wee specimen of humanity imaginable. His coat was
made of birch leaves, and he wore upon his head a helmet which
consisted of a gorse flower, while his feet were encased in pumps made
of beetle's wings. He ran his fingers over his instrument, and the
music made Tudur's hair stand on end. "Nos da'ch', nos da'ch'," said
the little man, which means "Good-night, good-night to you," in
English. "Ac i chwithau," replied Tudur; which again, in English,
means "The same to you." Then continued the little man, "You are fond
of dancing, Tudur; and if you but tarry awhile you shall behold some
of the best dancers in Wales, and I am the musician." Quoth Tudur,
"Then where is your harp? A Welshman even cannot dance without a
harp." "Oh," said the little man, "I can discourse better dance music
upon my fiddle." "Is it a fiddle you call that stringed wooden spoon
in your hand?" asked Tudur, for he had never seen such an instrument
before. And now Tudur beheld through the dusk hundreds of pretty
little sprites converging towards the spot where they stood, from all
parts of the mountain. Some were dressed in white, and some in blue,
and some in pink, and some carried glow-worms in their hands for
torches. And so lightly did they tread that not a blade nor a flower
was crushed beneath their weight, and every one made a curtsey or a
bow to Tudur as they passed, and Tudur doffed his cap and moved to
them in return. Presently the little minstrel drew his bow across the
strings of his instrument, and the music produced was so enchanting
that Tudur stood transfixed to the spot.' At the sound of the sweet
melody, the Tylwyth Teg ranged themselves in groups, and began to
dance. Now of all the dancing Tudur had ever seen, none was to be
compared to that he saw at this moment going on. He could not help
keeping time with his hands and feet to the merry music, but he dared
not join in the dance, 'for he thought within himself that to dance on
a mountain at night in strange company, to perhaps the devil's fiddle,
might not be the most direct route to heaven.' But at last he found
there was no resisting this bewitching strain, joined to the sight of
the capering Ellyllon. '"Now for it, then," screamed Tudur, as he
pitched his cap into the air under the excitement of delight. "Play
away, old devil; brimstone and water, if you like!" No sooner were the
words uttered than everything underwent a change. The gorse-blossom
cap vanished from the minstrel's head, and a pair of goat's horns
branched out instead. His face turned as black as soot; a long tail
grew out of his leafy coat, while cloven feet replaced the beetle-wing
pumps. Tudur's heart was heavy, but his heels were light. Horror was
in his bosom, but the impetus of motion was in his feet. The fairies
changed into a variety of forms. Some became goats, and some became
dogs, some assumed the shape of foxes, and others that of cats. It was
the strangest crew that ever surrounded a human being. The dance
became at last so furious that Tudur could not distinctly make out the
forms of the dancers. They reeled around him with such rapidity that
they almost resembled a wheel of fire. Still Tudur danced on. He could
not stop, the devil's fiddle was too much for him, as the figure with
the goat's horns kept pouring it out with unceasing vigour, and Tudur
kept reeling around in spite of himself. Next day Tudur's master
ascended the mountain in search of the lost shepherd and his sheep. He
found the sheep all right at the foot of the Fron, but fancy his
astonishment when, ascending higher, he saw Tudur spinning like mad in
the middle of the basin now known as Nant yr Ellyllon.' Some pious
words of the master broke the charm, and restored Tudur to his home in
Llangollen, where he told his adventures with great gusto for many
years afterwards.[42]

FOOTNOTE:

[42] Rev. T. R. Lloyd (Estyn), in 'The Principality.'

