XI.

Comment on the resemblances borne by these tales to the more famous
legends of other lands, is perhaps unnecessary; they will occur to
every reader who is at all familiar with the subject of folk-lore. To
those who are not, it is sufficient to say that these resemblances
exist, and afford still further testimony to the common origin of such
tales in a remote past. The legend last given embodies the curiosity
feature which is familiar through the story of Bluebeard, but has its
root in the story of Psyche. She was forbidden to look upon her
husband Eros, the god of love; she disobeyed the injunction, and the
beautiful palace in which she had dwelt with him vanished in an
instant, leaving her alone in a desolate spot. Ages older than the
Psyche story, however, is the legend embodying the original Aryan
myth. The drop of oil which falls upon the shoulder of the sleeping
prince and wakes him, revealing Psyche's curiosity and destroying her
happiness, is paralleled among the Welsh by the magic ointment in the
legend of the Fiend Master. This legend, it may be premised, is also
familiar to both France and Germany, where its details differ but
little from those here given: A respectable young Welshwoman of the
working class, who lived with her parents, went one day to a hiring
fair. Here she 'was addressed by a very noble-looking gentleman all in
black, who asked her if she would be a nursemaid, and undertake the
management of his children. She replied that she had no objection;
when he promised her immense wages, and said he would take her home
behind him, but that she must, before they started, consent to be
blindfolded. This done, she mounted behind him on a coal-black steed,
and away they rode at a great rate. At length they dismounted, when
her new master took her by the hand and led her on, still blindfolded,
for a considerable distance. The handkerchief was then removed, when
she beheld more grandeur than she had ever seen before; a beautiful
palace lighted up by more lights than she could count, and a number of
little children as beautiful as angels; also many noble-looking ladies
and gentlemen. The children her master put under her charge, and gave
her a box containing ointment, which she was to put on their eyes. At
the same time he gave her strict orders always to wash her hands
immediately after using the ointment, and be particularly careful
never to let a bit of it touch her own eyes. These injunctions she
strictly followed, and was for some time very happy; yet she sometimes
thought it odd that they should always live by candle-light; and she
wondered, too, that grand and beautiful as the palace was, such fine
ladies and gentlemen as were there should never wish to leave it. But
so it was; no one ever went out but her master. One morning, while
putting the ointment on the eyes of the children, her own eye itched,
and forgetting the orders of her master she touched one corner of it
with her finger which was covered with ointment. Immediately, with the
vision of that corner of her eye, she saw herself surrounded by
fearful flames; the ladies and gentlemen looked like devils, and the
children appeared like the most hideous imps of hell. Though with the
other parts of her eyes she beheld all grand and beautiful as before,
she could not help feeling much frightened at all this; but having
great presence of mind she let no one see her alarm. However, she took
the first opportunity of asking her master's leave to go and see her
friends. He said he would take her, but she must again consent to be
blindfolded. Accordingly a handkerchief was put over her eyes; she was
again mounted behind her master, and was soon put down in the
neighbourhood of her own house. It will be believed that she remained
quietly there, and took good care not to return to her place; but very
many years afterwards, being at a fair, she saw a man stealing
something from a stall, and with one corner of her eye beheld her old
master pushing his elbow. Unthinkingly she said, "How are you master?
how are the children?" He said, "How did you see me?" She answered,
"With the corner of my left eye." From that moment she was blind of
her left eye, and lived many years with only her right.'[45] An older
legend preserving this mythical detail is the story of Taliesin. Gwion
Bach's eyes are opened by a drop from Caridwen's caldron falling upon
his finger, which he puts in his mouth.

FOOTNOTE:

[45] 'Camb. Sup.,' 349.

