XIII.

The wide field of interest opened up in tales of this class is a
fascinating one to the students of fairy mythology. The whole world
seems to be the scene of such tales, and collectors of folk-lore in
many lands have laid claim to the discovery of 'the original' on
which the story of Rip van Winkle is based. It is an honour to
American genius, to which I cannot forbear a passing allusion, that of
all these legends, none has achieved so wide a fame as that which
Washington Irving has given to our literature, and Joseph Jefferson to
our stage. It is more than probable that Irving drew his inspiration
from Grimm, and that the Catskills are indebted to the Hartz Mountains
of Germany for their romantic fame. But the legends are endless in
which occur this unsuspected lapse of time among supernatural beings,
and the wandering back to the old home to find all changed. In Greece,
it is Epimenides, the poet, who, while searching for a lost sheep,
wanders into a cave where he slumbers forty-seven years. The Gaelic
and Teutonic legends are well known. But our wonder at the vitality of
this myth is greatest when we find it in both China and Japan. In the
Japanese account a young man fishing in his boat on the ocean is
invited by the goddess of the sea to her home beneath the waves. After
three days he desires to see his old mother and father. On parting she
gives him a golden casket and a key, but begs him never to open it. At
the village where he lived he finds that all is changed, and he can
get no trace of his parents until an aged woman recollects having
heard of their names. He finds their graves a hundred years old.
Thinking that three days could not have made such a change, and that
he was under a spell, he opens the casket. A white vapour rises, and
under its influence the young man falls to the ground. His hair turns
grey, his form loses its youth, and in a few moments he dies of old
age. The Chinese legend relates how two friends wandering amongst the
ravines of their native mountains in search of herbs for medicinal
purposes, come to a fairy bridge where two maidens of more than
earthly beauty are on guard. They invite them to the fairy land which
lies on the other side of the bridge, and the invitation being
accepted, they become enamoured of the maidens, and pass what to them
seems a short though blissful period of existence with the fairy folk.
At length they desire to revisit their earthly homes and are allowed
to return, when they find that seven generations have lived and died
during their apparently short absence, they themselves having become
centenarians.[46] In China, as elsewhere, the legend takes divers
forms.

FOOTNOTE:

[46] Dennys, 'Folk-Lore of China,' 98.



