I.

In those rare cases where it is not dancing which holds the victim of
Tylwyth Teg in its fatal fascination, the seducer is music. There is a
class of stories still common in Wales, in which is preserved a
wondrously beautiful survival of the primitive mythology. In the vast
middle ground between our own commonplace times and the pre-historic
ages we encounter more than once the lovely legend of the Birds of
Rhiannon, which sang so sweetly that the warrior knights stood
listening entranced for eighty years. This legend appears in the
Mabinogi of 'Branwen, daughter of Llyr,' and, as we read it there, is
a medieval tale; but the medieval authors of the Mabinogion as we know
them were working over old materials--telling again the old tales
which had come down through unnumbered centuries from father to son by
tradition. Cambrian poets of an earlier age often allude to the birds
of Rhiannon; they are mentioned in the Triads. In the Mabinogi, the
period the warriors listened is seven years. Seven men only had
escaped from a certain battle with the Irish, and they were bidden by
their dying chief to cut off his head and bear it to London and bury
it with the face towards France. Various were the adventures they
encountered while obeying this injunction. At Harlech they stopped to
rest, and sat down to eat and drink. 'And there came three birds, and
began singing unto them a certain song, and all the songs they had
ever heard were unpleasant compared thereto; and the birds seemed to
them to be at a great distance from them over the sea, yet they
appeared as distinct as if they were close by; and at this repast they
continued seven years.'[47] This enchanting fancy reappears in the
local story of Shon ap Shenkin, which was related to me by a farmer's
wife near the reputed scene of the legend. Pant Shon Shenkin has
already been mentioned as a famous centre for Carmarthenshire fairies.
The story of Taffy ap Sion and this of Shon ap Shenkin were probably
one and the same at some period in their career, although they are now
distinct. Shon ap Shenkin was a young man who lived hard by Pant Shon
Shenkin. As he was going afield early one fine summer's morning he
heard a little bird singing, in a most enchanting strain, on a tree
close by his path. Allured by the melody he sat down under the tree
until the music ceased, when he arose and looked about him. What was
his surprise at observing that the tree, which was green and full of
life when he sat down, was now withered and barkless! Filled with
astonishment he returned to the farm-house which he had left, as he
supposed, a few minutes before; but it also was changed, grown older,
and covered with ivy. In the doorway stood an old man whom he had
never before seen; he at once asked the old man what he wanted there.
'What do I want here?' ejaculated the old man, reddening angrily;
'that's a pretty question! Who are you that dare to insult me in my
own house?' 'In your own house? How is this? where's my father and
mother, whom I left here a few minutes since, whilst I have been
listening to the charming music under yon tree, which, when I rose,
was withered and leafless?' 'Under the tree!--music! what's your
name?' 'Shon ap Shenkin.' 'Alas, poor Shon, and is this indeed you!'
cried the old man. 'I often heard my grandfather, your father, speak
of you, and long did he bewail your absence. Fruitless inquiries were
made for you; but old Catti Maddock of Brechfa said you were under the
power of the fairies, and would not be released until the last sap of
that sycamore tree would be dried up. Embrace me, my dear uncle, for
you are my uncle--embrace your nephew.' With this the old man extended
his arms, but before the two men could embrace, poor Shon ap Shenkin
crumbled into dust on the doorstep.

  [Illustration: SHON AP SHENKIN RETURNS HOME.]

FOOTNOTE:

[47] Lady Charlotte Guest's 'Mabinogion,' 381.

