II.

The harp is played by Welsh fairies to an extent unknown in those
parts of the world where the harp is less popular among the people.
When any instrument is distinctly heard in fairy cymmoedd it is
usually the harp. Sometimes it is a fiddle, but then on close
examination it will be discovered that it is a captured mortal who is
playing it; the Tylwyth Teg prefer the harp. They play the bugle on
specially grand occasions, and there is a case or two on record where
the drone of the bagpipes was heard; but it is not doubted that the
player was some stray fairy from Scotland or elsewhere over the
border. On the top of Craig-y-Ddinas thousands of white fairies dance
to the music of many harps. In the dingle called Cwm Pergwm, in the
Vale of Neath, the Tylwyth Teg make music behind the waterfall, and
when they go off over the mountains the sounds of their harps are
heard dying away as they recede. The story which presents the Cambrian
equivalent of the Magic Flute substitutes a harp for the (to
Welshmen) less familiar instrument. As told to me this story runs
somewhat thus: A company of fairies which frequented Cader Idris were
in the habit of going about from cottage to cottage in that part of
Wales, in pursuit of information concerning the degree of benevolence
possessed by the cottagers. Those who gave these fairies an ungracious
welcome were subject to bad luck during the rest of their lives, but
those who were good to the little folk became the recipients of their
favour. Old Morgan ap Rhys sat one night in his own chimney corner
making himself comfortable with his pipe and his pint of cwrw da. The
good ale having melted his soul a trifle, he was in a more jolly mood
than was natural to him, when there came a little rap at the door,
which reached his ear dully through the smoke of his pipe and the
noise of his own voice--for in his merriment Morgan was singing a
roystering song, though he could not sing any better than a haw--which
is Welsh for a donkey. But Morgan did not take the trouble to get up
at sound of the rap; his manners were not the most refined; he thought
it was quite enough for a man on hospitable purposes bent to bawl
forth in ringing Welsh, 'Gwaed dyn a'i gilydd! Why don't you come in
when you've got as far as the door?' The welcome was not very polite,
but it was sufficient. The door opened, and three travellers entered,
looking worn and weary. Now these were the fairies from Cader Idris,
disguised in this manner for purposes of observation, and Morgan never
suspected they were other than they appeared. 'Good sir,' said one of
the travellers, 'we are worn and weary, but all we seek is a bite of
food to put in our wallet, and then we will go on our way.' 'Waw,
lads! is that all you want? Well, there, look you, is the loaf and the
cheese, and the knife lies by them, and you may cut what you like, and
fill your bellies as well as your wallet, for never shall it be said
that Morgan ap Rhys denied bread and cheese to a fellow creature.' The
travellers proceeded to help themselves, while Morgan continued to
drink and smoke, and to sing after his fashion, which was a very rough
fashion indeed. As they were about to go, the fairy travellers turned
to Morgan and said, 'Since you have been so generous we will show that
we are grateful. It is in our power to grant you any one wish you may
have; therefore tell us what that wish may be.'

'Ho, ho!' said Morgan, 'is that the case? Ah, I see you are making
sport of me. Wela, wela, the wish of my heart is to have a harp that
will play under my fingers no matter how ill I strike it; a harp that
will play lively tunes, look you; no melancholy music for me!' He had
hardly spoken, when to his astonishment, there on the hearth before
him stood a splendid harp, and he was alone. 'Waw!' cried Morgan,
'they're gone already.' Then looking behind him he saw they had not
taken the bread and cheese they had cut off, after all. ''Twas the
fairies, perhaps,' he muttered, but sat serenely quaffing his beer,
and staring at the harp. There was a sound of footsteps behind him,
and his wife came in from out doors with some friends. Morgan feeling
very jolly, thought he would raise a little laughter among them by
displaying his want of skill upon the harp. So he commenced to
play--oh, what a mad and capering tune it was! 'Waw!' said Morgan,
'but this is a harp. Holo! what ails you all?' For as fast as he
played his neighbours danced, every man, woman, and child of them all
footing it like mad creatures. Some of them bounded up against the
roof of the cottage till their heads cracked again; others spun round
and round, knocking over the furniture; and, as Morgan went on
thoughtlessly playing, they began to pray to him to stop before they
should be jolted to pieces. But Morgan found the scene too amusing to
want to stop; besides, he was enamoured of his own suddenly developed
skill as a musician; and he twanged the strings and laughed till his
sides ached and the tears rolled down his cheeks, at the antics of his
friends. Tired out at last he stopped, and the dancers fell exhausted
on the floor, the chairs, the tables, declaring the diawl himself was
in the harp. 'I know a tune worth two of that,' quoth Morgan, picking
up the harp again; but at sight of this motion all the company rushed
from the house and escaped, leaving Morgan rolling merrily in his
chair. Whenever Morgan got a little tipsy after that, he would get the
harp and set everybody round him to dancing; and the consequence was
he got a bad name, and no one would go near him. But all their
precautions did not prevent the neighbours from being caught now and
then, when Morgan took his revenge by making them dance till their
legs were broken, or some other damage was done them. Even lame people
and invalids were compelled to dance whenever they heard the music of
this diabolical telyn. In short, Morgan so abused his fairy gift that
one night the good people came and took it away from him, and he never
saw it more. The consequence was he became morose, and drank himself
to death--a warning to all who accept from the fairies favours they do
not deserve.

