IV.

In the legend of Iolo ap Hugh, than which no story is more widely
known in Wales, the fairy origin of that famous tune 'Ffarwel Ned
Pugh' is shown. It is a legend which suggests the Enchanted Flute
fancy in another form, the instrument here being a fiddle, and the
victim and player one under fairy control. In its introduction of
bread and cheese and candles it smacks heartily of the soil. In North
Wales there is a famous cave which is said to reach from its entrance
on the hillside 'under the Morda, the Ceiriog, and a thousand other
streams, under many a league of mountain, marsh and moor, under the
almost unfathomable wells that, though now choked up, once supplied
Sycharth, the fortress of Glyndwrdwy, all the way to Chirk Castle.'
Tradition said that whoever went within five paces of its mouth would
be drawn into it and lost. That the peasants dwelling near it had a
thorough respect for this tradition, was proved by the fact that all
around the dangerous hole 'the grass grew as thick and as rank as in
the wilds of America or some unapproached ledge of the Alps.' Both men
and animals feared the spot: 'A fox, with a pack of hounds in full cry
at his tail,' once turned short round on approaching it, 'with his
hair all bristled and fretted like frostwork with terror,' and ran
into the middle of the pack, 'as if anything earthly--even an earthly
death--was a relief to his supernatural perturbations.' And the dogs
in pursuit of this fox all declined to seize him, on account of the
phosphoric smell and gleam of his coat. Moreover, 'Elias ap Evan, who
happened one fair night to stagger just upon the rim of the forbidden
space,' was so frightened at what he saw and heard that he arrived at
home perfectly sober, 'the only interval of sobriety, morning, noon,
or night, Elias had been afflicted with for upwards of twenty years.'
Nor ever after that experience--concerning which he was wont to shake
his head solemnly, as if he might tell wondrous tales an' he
dared--could Elias get tipsy, drink he never so faithfully to that
end. As he himself expressed it, 'His shadow walked steadily before
him, that at one time wheeled around him like a pointer over bog and
stone.' One misty Hallow E'en, Iolo ap Hugh, the fiddler, determined
to solve the mysteries of the Ogof, or Cave, provided himself with 'an
immense quantity of bread and cheese and seven pounds of candles,' and
ventured in. He never returned; but long, long afterwards, at the
twilight of another Hallow E'en, an old shepherd was passing that--as
he called it--'Land-Maelstrom of Diaboly,' when he heard a faint burst
of melody dancing up and down the rocks above the cave. As he
listened, the music gradually 'moulded itself in something like a
tune, though it was a tune the shepherd had never heard before.' And
it sounded as if it were being played by some jolting fiend, so rugged
was its rhythm, so repeated its discordant groans. Now there appeared
at the mouth of the Ogof a figure well-known to the shepherd by
remembrance. It was dimly visible; but it was Iolo ap Hugh, one could
see that at once. He was capering madly to the music of his own
fiddle, with a lantern dangling at his breast. 'Suddenly the moon
shone full on the cave's yellow mouth, and the shepherd saw poor Iolo
for a single moment--but it was distinctly and horribly. His face was
pale as marble, and his eyes stared fixedly and deathfully, whilst his
head dangled loose and unjointed on his shoulders. His arms seemed to
keep his fiddlestick in motion without the least sympathy from their
master. The shepherd saw him a moment on the verge of the cave, and
then, still capering and fiddling, vanish like a shadow from his
sight;' but the old man was heard to say he seemed as if he slipped
into the cave in a manner quite different from the step of a living
and a willing man; 'he was dragged inwards like the smoke up the
chimney, or the mist at sunrise.' Years elapsed; 'all hopes and
sorrows connected with poor Iolo had not only passed away, but were
nearly forgotten; the old shepherd had long lived in a parish at a
considerable distance amongst the hills. One cold December Sunday
evening he and his fellow-parishioners were shivering in their seats
as the clerk was beginning to light the church, when a strange burst
of music, starting suddenly from beneath the aisle, threw the whole
congregation into confusion, and then it passed faintly along to the
farther end of the church, and died gradually away till at last it was
impossible to distinguish it from the wind that was careering and
wailing through almost every pillar of the old church.' The shepherd
immediately recognised this to be the tune Iolo had played at the
mouth of the Ogof. The parson of the parish--a connoisseur in
music--took it down from the old man's whistling; and to this day, if
you go to the cave on Hallow eve and put your ear to the aperture, you
may hear the tune 'Ffarwel Ned Pugh' as distinctly as you may hear the
waves roar in a sea-shell. 'And it is said that in certain nights in
leap-year a star stands opposite the farther end of the cave, and
enables you to view all through it and to see Iolo and its other
inmates.'[49]

  [Music: FFARWEL NED PUGH.]

FOOTNOTE:

[49] 'Camb. Quarterly,' i., 45.



