II.

Allusion has been made in the preceding pages to the Prophet Jones,
and as some account of this personage is imperatively called for in a
work treating of Welsh folk-lore, I will give it here, before citing
his remarks respecting fairy circles. Edmund Jones, 'of the Tranch,'
was a dissenting minister, noted in Monmouthshire in the first years
of the present century for his fervent piety and his large credulity
with regard to fairies and all other goblins. He was for many years
pastor of the congregation of Protestant Dissenters at the Ebenezer
Chapel, near Pontypool, and lived at a place called 'The Tranch,' near
there. He wrote and published two books, one an 'Account of the Parish
of Aberystruth,' printed at Trevecca; the other a 'Relation of
Apparitions of Spirits in the County of Monmouth and the Principality
of Wales,' printed at Newport; and they have been referred to by most
writers on folk-lore who have attempted any account of Welsh
superstitions during the past half-century; but the books are
extremely rare, and writers who have quoted from them have generally
been content to do so at second-hand. Keightley,[50] quoting from the
'Apparitions,' misprints the author's name 'Edward Jones of the
Tiarch,' and accredits the publication to 'the latter half of the
eighteenth century,' whereas it was published in 1813. Keightley's
quotations are taken from Croker, who himself had never seen the book,
but heard of it through a Welsh friend. It is not in the library of
the British Museum, and I know of but a few copies in Wales; the one I
saw is at Swansea. The author of these curious volumes was called the
Prophet Jones, because of his gift of prophecy--so a Welshman in
Monmouthshire told me. In my informant's words, 'He was noted in his
district for foretelling things. He would, for instance, be asked to
preach at some anniversary, or quarterly meeting, and he would answer,
"I cannot, on that day; the rain will descend in torrents, and there
will be no congregation." He would give the last mite he possessed to
the needy, and tell his wife, "God will send a messenger with food and
raiment at nine o'clock to-morrow." And so it would be.' He was a
thorough-going believer in Welsh fairies, and full of indignant scorn
toward all who dared question their reality. To him these phantoms
were part and parcel of the Christian faith, and those who disbelieved
in them were denounced as Sadducees and infidels.

FOOTNOTE:

[50] 'Fairy Mythology,' 412.

