VII.

The Welsh sheep, it is affirmed, are the only beasts which will eat
the grass that grows in the fairy rings; all other creatures avoid it,
but the sheep eat it greedily--hence the superiority of Welsh mutton
over any mutton in the wide world. The Prophet Jones tells of the
sheepfold of the fairies, which he himself saw--a circumstance to be
accorded due weight, the judicious reader will at once perceive,
because as a habit Mr. Jones was not specially given to seeing goblins
on his own account. He believes in them with all his heart, but it is
usually a friend or acquaintance who has seen them. In this instance,
therefore, the exception is to be noted sharply. He thus tells the
tale: 'If any think I am too credulous in these relations, and speak
of things of which I myself have had no experience, I must let them
know they are mistaken. For when a very young boy, going with my aunt,
early in the morning, but after sun-rising, from Hafodafel towards my
father's house at Pen-y-Llwyn, at the end of the upper field of Cae'r
Cefn, ... I saw the likeness of a sheepfold, with the door towards the
south, ... and within the fold a company of many people. Some sitting
down, and some going in, and coming out, bowing their heads as they
passed under the branch over the door.... I well remember the
resemblance among them of a fair woman with a high-crown hat and a red
jacket, who made a better appearance than the rest, and whom I think
they seemed to honour. I still have a pretty clear idea of her white
face and well-formed countenance. The men wore white cravats.... I
wondered at my aunt, going before me, that she did not look towards
them, and we going so near them. As for me, I was loth to speak until
I passed them some way, and then told my aunt what I had seen, at
which she wondered, and said I dreamed.... There was no fold in that
place. There is indeed the ruins of some small edifice in that place,
most likely a fold, but so old that the stones are swallowed up, and
almost wholly crusted over with earth and grass.'

This tale has long been deemed a poser by the believers in Cambrian
phantoms; but there is something to be said on the side of doubt.
Conceding that the Reverend Edmund Jones, the dissenting minister, was
an honest gentleman who meant to tell truth, it is still possible that
Master Neddy Jones, the lad, could draw a long bow like another boy;
and that having seen, possibly, some gypsy group (or possibly nothing
whatever) he embellished his tale to excite wonderment, as boys do.
Telling a fictitious tale so often that one at last comes to believe
it oneself, is a well-known mental phenomenon.

