II.

A popular protection from the encroachments of fairies is the eithin,
or prickly furze, common in Wales. It is believed that the fairies
cannot penetrate a fence or hedge composed of this thorny shrub. An
account illustrating this, and otherwise curious in its details, was
given in 1871 by a prominent resident of Anglesea:[58] 'One day, some
thirty years ago, Mrs. Stanley went to one of the old houses to see an
old woman she often visited. It was a wretched hovel; so unusually
dark when she opened the door, that she called to old Betty Griffith,
but getting no answer she entered the room. A little tiny window of
one pane of glass at the further side of the room gave a feeble light.
A few cinders alight in the miserable grate also gave a glimmer of
light, which enabled her to see where the bed used to be, in a recess.
To her surprise she saw it entirely shut out by a barricade of thick
gorse, so closely packed and piled up that no bed was to be seen.
Again she called Betty Griffith; no response came. She looked round
the wretched room; the only symptom of life was a plant of the
Wandering Jew (_Saxifraga tricolor_), so called by the poor people,
and dearly loved to grace their windows. It was planted in a broken
jar or teapot on the window, trailing its long tendrils around, with
here and there a new formed plant seeming to derive sustenance from
the air alone. As she stood, struck with the miserable poverty of the
human abode, a faint sigh came from behind the gorse. She went close
and said, "Betty, where are you?" Betty instantly recognised her
voice, and ventured to turn herself round from the wall. Mrs. Stanley
then made a small opening in the gorse barricade, which sadly pricked
her fingers; she saw Betty in her bed and asked her, "Are you not
well? are you cold, that you are so closed up?" "Cold! no. It is not
cold, Mrs. Stanley; it is the Tylwyth Teg; they never will leave me
alone, there they sit making faces at me, and trying to come to me."
"Indeed! oh how I should like to see them, Betty." "Like to see them,
is it? Oh, don't say so." "Oh but Betty, they must be so pretty and
good." "Good? they are not good." By this time the old woman got
excited, and Mrs. Stanley knew she should hear more from her about the
fairies, so she said, "Well, I will go out; they never will come if I
am here." Old Betty replied sharply, "No, do not go. You must not
leave me. I will tell you all about them. Ah! they come and plague me
sadly. If I am up they will sit upon the table; they turn my milk sour
and spill my tea; then they will not leave me at peace in my bed, but
come all round me and mock at me." "But Betty, tell me what is all
this gorse for? It must have been great trouble for you to make it all
so close." "Is it not to keep them off? They cannot get through this,
it pricks them so bad, and then I get some rest." So she replaced the
gorse and left old Betty Griffith happy in her device for getting rid
of the Tylwyth Teg.'

FOOTNOTE:

[58] Hon. W. O. Stanley, in 'Notes and Queries.'

