I.

'This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so,' says the old shepherd
in 'Winter's Tale;' sagely adding, 'Up with it, keep it close; home,
home, the next way. We are lucky, boy, and to be so still, requires
nothing but secrecy.'[59] Here we have the traditional belief of the
Welsh peasantry in a nut-shell. Fairy money is as good as any, so long
as its source is kept a profound secret; if the finder relate the
particulars of his good fortune, it will vanish. Sometimes--especially
in cases where the money has been spent--the evil result of tattling
consists in there being no further favours of the sort. The same law
governs fairy gifts of all kinds. A Breconshire legend tells of the
generosity of the Tylwyth Teg in presenting the peasantry with loaves
of bread, which turned to toadstools next morning; it was necessary to
eat the bread in darkness and silence to avoid this transformation.
The story of Gitto Bach, a familiar one in Wales, is a picturesque
example. Gitto Bach (little Griffith), a good little farmer's boy of
Glamorganshire, used often to ramble to the top of the mountain to
look after his father's sheep. On his return he would show his
brothers and sisters pieces of remarkably white paper, like crown
pieces, with letters stamped upon them, which he said were given to
him by the little children with whom he played on the mountain. One
day he did not return. For two years nothing was heard of him.
Meantime other children occasionally got like crown-pieces of paper
from the mountains. One morning when Gitto's mother opened the door
there he sat--the truant!--dressed exactly as he was when she saw him
last, two years before. He had a little bundle under his arm. 'Where
in the world have you been all this time?' asked the mother, 'Why,
it's only yesterday I went away!' quoth Gitto. 'Look at the pretty
clothes the children gave me on the mountain, for dancing with them to
the music of their harps.' With this he opened his bundle, and showed
a handsome dress; and behold, it was only paper, like the fairy money.

FOOTNOTE:

[59] 'Winter's Tale,' Act III., Sc. 3.

