IV.

The ghosts of departed mortals are usually the late personal
acquaintances of the people who see them. But sometimes they are
strangers whom nobody knows, and concerning whom everybody is curious.
Two such ghosts haunted the streets of Ebbw Vale, in Glamorganshire,
in January, 1877. One was in the shape of an old woman, the other in
that of a girl child. Timid people kept indoors after nightfall, and
there were many who believed thoroughly in the ghostly character of
the mysterious visitors. Efforts were made to catch them, but they
eluded capture. It was hinted by materialists that they were thieves;
by unbelievers in spiritualism that they had perhaps escaped from a
seance in some adjoining town. These ghosts, however, are not very
interesting. A cultivated moderner can have no satisfaction in forming
the acquaintance of a seance ghost; it is quite otherwise in the case
of a respectable old family goblin which has haunted a friend's house
in the most orthodox manner for centuries. Such ghosts are numerous in
Wales, and quite faithfully believed in by selected individuals.
Indeed one of the highest claims to a dignified antiquity that can be
put in by a Welsh family mansion, is the possession of a good
old-fashioned blood-curdling spectre--like that, for example, which
has haunted Duffryn House, a handsome stone manse near Cardiff, for
the past two hundred years and more. This is the ghost of the doughty
admiral Sir Thomas Button, famed in his day as an Arctic navigator.
Since his death he has faithfully haunted (so the local farm folk say)
the cellar and the garden of Duffryn House, where he lived, when he
did live, which was in the 17th century. He has never been known to
appear in hall or chamber of the mansion, within the memory of man,
but has been seen hovering over the beer butt or tun in the cellar,
commemorated in his name, and walking in the flower-garden of a fine
windy night.

It is noteworthy that in Wales it is by no means necessary that a
house should be tenantless, mortally speaking, merely because a ghost
haunts it. The dreary picture of desolation drawn by Hood, the
all-sufficient explanation of which was--

    ... the place is haunted!

would not recall the smug tidiness of Duffryn House, whose clean-cut
lawns and well-trimmed hedges are fit surroundings of a mansion where
luxurious comfort reigns. A ghost which confines itself to the cellar
and the garden need disturb neither the merrymaking nor the slumbers
of the guests.

St. Donat's Castle is down on the southern coast of Glamorganshire, in
a primitive region not yet profaned by railroads, nor likely to be
perhaps for many years to come. It is owned and inhabited by a worthy
gentleman whose ancestors for seven centuries sleep in the graveyard
under the old castle wall. Its favourite ghost--for to confine this
or any other ancient Welsh castle to a single ghost would be almost
disrespectful--is that of Lady Stradling, who was done away with by
some of her family in those wicked old times when families did not
always dwell in peace together. This ghost makes a practice of
appearing when any mishap is about to befall a member of the house of
Stradling--the direct line of which is, however, extinct, a fact not
very well apprehended among the neighbouring peasantry. She wears
high-heeled shoes and a long trailing gown of the finest silk. In this
guise doth she wander up and down the long majestic halls and
chambers, and, while she wanders, the castle hounds refuse to rest,
but with their howlings raise all the dogs of the village under the
hill.

