V.

Ghosts of this sort are vague and purposeless in character, beyond a
general blood-curdling office which in all ghosts doth dwell. They
haunt not only castles and family mansions, but bridges, rocks, and
roads, objectless but frightful. The ghost of Pont Cwnca Bach, near
Yscanhir, in Carmarthenshire, frightens people off the bridge into the
rivulet. Many belated peasants have had this dire experience at the
little bridge, afterwards wandering away in a dazed condition, and
finding themselves on recovering at some distance from home, often in
the middle of a bog. In crossing this bridge people were seized with
'a kind of _cold dread_,' and felt 'a peculiar sensation' which they
could not describe, but which the poorest fancy can no doubt imagine.
Another purposeless spectre exists in the legend of Catrin Gwyn, told
in Cardiganshire. The ruin of a shepherd's cottage, standing on a
mountain waste near the river Rheidol, is the haunt of this spectre.
A peasant who was asked to escort a stranger up the narrow defile of
rocks by the ruin, in horror exclaimed, 'Yn enw y daioni, peidiwch,'
(in the name of heaven, sir, don't go!) 'or you'll meet White Catti of
the Grove Cave.' 'And what's that?' 'An evil spirit, sir.' And the
superstitious peasant would neither be laughed nor reasoned out of his
fears. Catrin was the bride of a young shepherd living near
Machynlleth in 1705. One day she went to market with a party of other
peasants, who separated from her on the return way at a point two
miles from Gelli Gogo. She was never more seen alive. A violent storm
arose in the night, and next day a scrap of her red cloak was found on
the edge of a frightful bog, in which she is believed to have
disappeared in the darkness and storm. The husband went mad; their
cottage fell to decay; and to this day the shepherds declare that
Catti's ghost haunts the spot. It is most often seen, and in its most
terrific shape, during howling storms, when it rides on the gale,
shrieking as it goes.[64]

FOOTNOTE:

[64] 'Camb. Quarterly,' i., 452.

