III.

In the Gwyllgi, or Dog of Darkness, is seen a spirit of terrible form,
well known to students of folk-lore. This is a frightful apparition of
a mastiff, with a baleful breath and blazing red eyes which shine like
fire in the night. It is huge in size, and reminds us of the 'shaggy
mastiff larger than a steed nine winters old,' which guarded the sheep
before the castle of Yspaddaden Pencawr. 'All the dead trees and
bushes in the plain he burnt with his breath down to the very
ground.'[70] The lane leading from Mousiad to Lisworney-Crossways, is
reported to have been haunted by a Gwyllgi of the most terrible
aspect. Mr. Jenkin, a worthy farmer living near there, was one night
returning home from market on a young mare, when suddenly the animal
shied, reared, tumbled the farmer off, and bolted for home. Old
Anthony the farm-servant, found her standing trembling by the
barn-door, and well knowing the lane she had come through suspected
she had seen the Gwyllgi. He and the other servants of the farm all
went down the road, and there in the haunted lane they found the
farmer, on his back in the mud. Being questioned, the farmer protested
it was the Gwyllgi and nothing less, that had made all this trouble,
and his nerves were so shaken by the shock that he had to be supported
on either side to get him home, slipping and staggering in the mud in
truly dreadful fashion all the way. It is the usual experience of
people who meet the Gwyllgi that they are so overcome with terror by
its unearthly howl, or by the glare of its fiery eyes, that they fall
senseless. Old Anthony, however, used to say that he had met the
Gwyllgi without this result. As he was coming home from courting a
young woman of his acquaintance (name delicately withheld, as he did
not marry her) late one Sunday night--or it may have been Monday
morning--he encountered in the haunted lane two large shining eyes,
which drew nearer and nearer to him. He was dimly able to discern, in
connection with the gleaming eyes, what seemed a form of human shape
above, but with the body and limbs of a large spotted dog. He threw
his hat at the terrible eyes, and the hat went whisking right through
them, falling in the road beyond. However, the spectre disappeared,
and the brave Anthony hurried home as fast as his shaking legs would
carry him.

As Mr. David Walter, of Pembrokeshire, 'a religious man, and far from
fear and superstition,' was travelling by himself through a field
called the Cot Moor, where there are two stones set up called the
Devil's Nags, which are said to be haunted, he was suddenly seized and
thrown over a hedge. He went there another day, taking with him for
protection a strong fighting mastiff dog. When he had come near the
Devil's Nags there appeared in his path the apparition of a dog more
terrible than any he had ever seen. In vain he tried to set his
mastiff on; the huge beast crouched frightened by his master's feet
and refused to attack the spectre. Whereupon his master boldly stooped
to pick up a stone, thinking that would frighten the evil dog; but
suddenly a circle of fire surrounded it, which lighting up the gloom,
showed the white snip down the dog's nose, and his grinning teeth, and
white tail. 'He then knew it was one of the infernal dogs of
hell.'[71]

Rebecca Adams was 'a woman who appeared to be a true living
experimental Christian, beyond many,' and she lived near Laugharne
Castle, in Carmarthenshire. One evening when she was going to
Laugharne town on some business, her mother dissuaded her from going,
telling her she would be benighted, and might be terrified by some
apparition at Pant y Madog. This was a pit by the side of the lane
leading to Laugharne, which was never known to be dry, and which was
haunted, as many had both seen and heard apparitions there. But the
bold Rebecca was not to be frighted at such nonsense, and went her
way. It was rather dark when she was returning, and she had passed by
the haunted pit of Pant y Madog, and was congratulating herself on
having seen no ghost. Suddenly she saw a great dog coming towards her.
When within about four or five yards of her it stopped, squatted on
its haunches, 'and set up such a scream, so loud, so horrible, and so
strong, that she thought the earth moved under her.' Then she fell
down in a swoon. When she revived it was gone; and it was past
midnight when she got home, weak and exhausted.
