I.

The grotesque ghosts of Welsh folk-lore are often most diverting
acquaintances. They are ghosts on horseback, or with coloured faces,
or of huge and monstrous form; or they indulge in strange gymnastics,
in whirling, throwing stones, or whistling. A phantom horseman,
encountered by the Rev. John Jones, of Holywell, in Flintshire, as
described by himself, is worthy of Heinrich Zschokke. This Mr. Jones
was a preacher of extraordinary power, renowned and respected
throughout Wales. He was one day travelling alone on horseback from
Bala, in Merionethshire, to Machynlleth, Montgomeryshire, and as he
approached a forest which lay in his way he was dogged by a
murderous-looking man carrying a sharp sickle. The minister felt sure
this man meditated an attack on his life, from his conduct in running
crouched along behind hedges, and from his having met the man at the
village inn of Llanuwchllyn, where the minister exposed his watch and
purse. Presently he saw the man conceal himself at a place where the
hedge was thick, and where a gate crossed the road; and feeling sure
that here he should be attacked, he stopped his horse to reflect on
the situation. No house was in sight, and the road was hidden by high
hedges on either side. Should he turn back? 'In despair, rather than
in a spirit of humble trust and confidence,' says the good man, 'I
bowed my head, and offered up a silent prayer. At this juncture my
horse, growing impatient of the delay, started off. I clutched the
reins, which I had let fall on his neck, when, happening to turn my
eyes, I saw, to my utter astonishment, that I was no longer alone:
there, by my side, I beheld a horseman in a dark dress, mounted on a
white steed. In intense amazement I gazed upon him. Where could he
have come from? He appeared as suddenly as if he had sprung from the
earth; he must have been riding behind and have overtaken me, and yet
I had not heard the slightest sound. It was mysterious, inexplicable;
but joy overcame my feelings of wonder, and I began at once to address
my companion. I asked him if he had seen any one, and then described
to him what had taken place, and how relieved I felt by his sudden
appearance. He made no reply, and on looking at his face he seemed
paying but slight attention to my words, but continued intently gazing
in the direction of the gate, now about a quarter of a mile ahead. I
followed his gaze, and saw the reaper emerge from his concealment and
run across a field to our left, resheathing his sickle as he hurried
along. He had evidently seen that I was no longer alone, and had
relinquished his intended attempt.' Seeking to converse with the
mysterious horseman, the minister found the phantom was speechless. In
vain he addressed it in both Welsh and English; not a word did it
utter, save that once the minister thought it said 'Amen,' to a pious
remark. Suddenly it was gone. 'The mysterious horseman was gone; he
was not to be seen; he had disappeared as mysteriously as he had
come. What could have become of him? He could not have gone through
the gate, nor have made his horse leap the high hedges, which on both
sides shut in the road. Where was he? had I been dreaming? was it an
apparition--a spectre, which had been riding by my side for the last
ten minutes? was it but a creature of my imagination? I tried hard to
convince myself that this was the case; but why had the reaper
resheathed his murderous-looking sickle and fled? And then a feeling
of profound awe began to creep over my soul. I remembered the singular
way of his first appearance, his long silence, and the single word to
which he had given utterance after I had mentioned the name of the
Lord; the single occasion on which I had done so. What could I then
believe but that ... in the mysterious horseman I had a special
interference of Providence, by which I was delivered from a position
of extreme danger?'

