V.

The antics of these and similar inhabitants of the Cambrian
spirit-world at times outdo the most absurd capers of modern
spiritualism. At the house of a certain farmer in the parish of
Llanllechid, in Carnarvonshire, there was great disturbance by a
spirit which threw stones into the house, and from one room to
another, which hit and hurt the people who lived there. The stones
were of various sizes, the largest weighing twenty-seven pounds. Most
of them were river stones, from the stream which runs hard by. Some
clergymen came from Bangor and read prayers in the house, to drive the
spirit away, but their faith was not strong enough, and stones were
thrown at them, so that they retired from the contest. The family
finally had to abandon the house.

On the farm of Edward Roberts, in the parish of Llangunllo, in
Radnorshire, there was a spirit whose antics were somewhat remarkable.
As the servant-man was threshing, the threshel was taken out of his
hand and thrown upon the hay-loft. At first he did not mind this so
much, but when the trick had been repeated three or four times he
became concerned about it, and went into the house to tell of it. The
master of the house was away, but the wife and the maid-servant
laughed at the man, and merrily said they would go to the barn to
protect him. So they went out there and sat, the one to knit and the
other to wind yarn. They were not there long before their things were
taken from their hands and tumbled about the barn. On returning to the
house, they perceived the dishes on the shelves move to and fro, and
some were thrown on to the stone floor and broken. That night there
was a terrible clattering among the dishes, and next morning they
could scarcely tread without stepping on the wrecks of crockery which
lay about. This pleasant experience was often repeated. Neighbours
came to see. People even came from far to satisfy their
curiosity--some from so far as Knighton; and one who came from
Knighton to read prayers for the exorcising of the spirit, had the
book taken out of his hand and thrown upstairs. Stones were often cast
at the people, and once iron was projected from the chimney at them.
At last the spirit set the house on fire, and nothing could quench it;
the house was burnt down: nothing but the walls and the two chimneys
stood, long after, to greet the eyes of people who passed to and from
Knighton market.

