VI.

A spirit which haunted the house of William Thomas, in Tridoll Valley,
Glamorganshire, used to hit the maid-servant on the side of her head,
as it were with a cushion, when she was coming down the stairs. 'One
time she brought a marment of water into the house,' and the water was
thrown over her person. Another time there came so great an abundance
of pilchards in the sea, that the people could scarcely devour them,
and the maid asked leave of her master to go and fetch some of them.
'No,' said he, being a very just man, 'the pilchards are sent for the
use of poor people; we do not want them.' But the maid was very fond
of pilchards, and so she went without leave, and brought some to the
house. After giving a turn about the house, she went to look for her
fish, and found them thrown out upon the dunghill. 'Well,' said her
master, 'did not I tell thee not to go?' Once a pot of meat was on
the fire, and when they took it off they found both meat and broth
gone, none knew where, and the pot as empty as their own bellies.
Sometimes the clasped Bible would be thrown whisking by their heads;
and 'so it would do with the gads of the steller, and once it struck
one of them against the screen where a person then sat, and the mark
of it still to be seen in the hard board.' Once the china dishes were
thrown off the shelf, and not one broke. 'It was a great business with
this light-hating spirit to throw an old lanthorn about the house
without breaking it.' When the maid went a-milking to the barn, the
barn-door would be suddenly shut upon her as she was milking the cow;
then when she rose up the spirit began to turn the door backwards and
forwards with an idle ringing noise. Once it tried to make trouble
between the mistress and the maid by strewing charcoal ashes on the
milk. When William Evans, a neighbour, went there to pray, as he knelt
by the bedside, it struck the bed such a bang with a trencher that it
made a report like a gun, so that both the bed and the room shook
perceptibly. On another occasion, it made a sudden loud noise, which
made the master think his house was falling down, and he was
prodigiously terrified; it never after that made so loud a noise.

The Rev. R. Tibbet, a dissenting minister from Montgomeryshire, was
one night sleeping in the house, with another person in the bed with
him; and they had a tussle with the Tridoll spirit for possession of
the bed-clothes. By praying and pulling with equal energy, the parson
beat the spirit, and kept the bed-clothes. But the spirit, apparently
angered by this failure, struck the bed with the cawnen (a vessel to
hold grain) such a blow that the bed was knocked out of its place.
Then they lit a light and the spirit left them alone. It was a
favourite diversion with this goblin to hover about William Thomas
when he was shaving, and occasionally cuff him on the side of his
head--the consequence being that the persecuted farmer shaved himself
by fits and starts, in a very unsatisfactory manner, and in a most
uncomfortable state of mind. For about two years it troubled the whole
of that family, during which period it had intervals of quiet lasting
for a fortnight or three weeks. Once it endeavoured to hinder them
from going to church, by hiding the bunch of keys, on the Lord's day,
so that for all their searching they could not find them. The good man
of the house bade them not to yield to the devil, and as they were
loth to appear in their old clothes at meeting, they were about to
break the locks; but first concluded to kneel in prayer, and so did.
After their prayers they found the keys where they used to be, but
where they could not find them before. One night the spirit divided
the books among the members of the family, after they had gone to bed.
To the man of the house it gave the Bible, to the woman of the house
'Allen's Sure Guide,' and upon the bed of the maid-servant (whom it
was specially fond of plaguing) it piled a lot of English books, which
language she did not understand. The maid was heartily afraid of the
spirit, and used to fall on her knees and go to praying with
chattering teeth, at all hours of the day or night; and prayer this
spirit could not abide. When the maid would go about in the night with
a candle, the light thereof would diminish, grow feeble as if in
dampness, and finally go out. The result was the maid was generally
excused from making journeys into cellar or garret after dark, very
much to her satisfaction.

Particularly did this frisky Tridoll spirit trouble the maid-servant
after she had gone to bed--in winter hauling the bed-clothes off her;
in summer piling more on her. Now there was a young man, a first
cousin to William Thomas, who could not be got to believe there was a
spirit at his kinsman's house, and said the family were only making
tricks with one another, 'and very strong he was, a hero of an
unbeliever, like many of his brethren in infidelity.' One night
William Thomas and his wife went to a neighbour's wake, and left the
house in charge of the doubting cousin, who searched the place all
over, and then went to bed there; and no spirit came to disturb him.
This made him stronger than ever in his unbelief. But soon after he
slept there again, when they were all there, and before going to bed
he said aloud to the maid, 'If anything comes to disturb thee, Ally,
call upon me, as I lie in the next room to you.' During the night the
maid cried out that the spirit was pulling the clothes off her bed,
and the doubting cousin awoke, jumped out of bed, and ran to catch the
person he believed to be playing tricks with the maid. But there was
no creature visible, although there rained upon his doubting head a
series of cuffs, and about his person a fusillade of kicks, which
thrust the unbelief quite out of him, so that he doubted no more. The
departure of this spirit came about thus: William Thomas being in bed
with his wife, heard a voice calling him. He awaked his wife, and
rising on his elbow said to the invisible spirit, 'In the name of God
what seekest thou in my house? Hast thou anything to say to me?' The
spirit answered, 'I have,' and desired him to remove certain things
out of a place where they had been mislaid. 'Satan,' answered William
Thomas, in a candid manner, 'I'll do nothing thou biddest me; I
command thee, in the name of God, to depart from my house.' And it
obeyed.

