II.

The sort of familiar spirit employed by magicians in the eighteenth
and preceding centuries was distinctly a demon. The spirit of this
class which was controlled by Sir David Llwyd is celebrated in Wales.
This Sir David was a famous dealer in the black art, who lived in
Cardiganshire. He was a physician, and at one time a curate; but being
known to deal in the magic art, he was turned out of the curacy, and
obliged to live by practising physic. It was thought he learned the
magic art in Oxford. 'It was this man's great wickedness,' says the
Prophet Jones, 'to make use of a familiar spirit.... The bishop did
well in turning him out of the sacred office, though he was no
ill-tempered man, for how unfit was such a man to read the sacred
Scripture! With what conscience could he ask the sponsors in baptism
to undertake for the child to renounce the world, the flesh and the
devil, who himself was familiar with one of the spirits of
darkness?... Of this Sir David I have heard much, but chiefly depend
upon what was told to me by the Rev. Mr. Thomas Lewis, the curate of
Landdw and Tolachdy, an excellent preacher of the gospel; and not
sufficiently esteemed by his people, (which likely will bring a
judgment on them in time to come.) Mr. Lewis knew the young woman who
had been Sir David's maid servant, and the house where he lived.' His
familiar spirit he kept locked up in a book. Once while he was in
Radnorshire, in going from one house to another he accidentally left
this book behind him, and sent his boy back to fetch it. The boy,
being of an inquisitive turn of mind, opened the book--a thing his
master had expressly charged him not to do--and the familiar spirit
immediately demanded to be set at work. The boy, though very much
alarmed, had the wit to answer, 'Tafl gerrig o'r afon,' (throw stones
out of the river,) which the spirit immediately did, so that the air
was for a time full of flying stones, and the boy was fain to skip
about in a surprisingly active manner in order to dodge the same.
After a while, having thrown up a great quantity of stones out of the
river, (the Wye,) the spirit again, with the pertinacity of its kind,
asked for something to do; whereupon the boy bade it throw the stones
back again, which it did. Sir David having waited a long time for the
boy to return, began to suspect that things had gone wrong, and so
hastened back after him, and commanded the familiar spirit again into
his book.

