IV.

The legend of the Lady of the Wood is contained in the Iolo MSS., and
is of considerable antiquity. It is a most fascinating tale: Einion,
the son of Gwalchmai, 'was one fine summer morning walking in the
woods of Treveilir,' when 'he beheld a graceful slender lady of
elegant growth, and delicate feature, and her complexion surpassing
every white and red in the morning dawn and the mountain snow, and
every beautiful colour in the blossoms of wood, field, and hill. And
then he felt in his heart an inconceivable commotion of affection, and
he approached her in a courteous manner, and she also approached him
in the same manner; and he saluted her, and she returned his
salutation; and by these mutual salutations he perceived that his
society was not disagreeable to her. He then chanced to cast his eye
upon her foot, and he saw that she had hoofs instead of feet, and he
became exceedingly dissatisfied,' as well he might. But the lady gave
him to understand that he must pay no attention to this trifling freak
of nature. 'Thou must,' she said, 'follow me wheresoever I go, as long
as I continue in my beauty.' The son of Gwalchmai thereupon asked
permission to go and say good-bye to his wife, at least. This the lady
agreed to; 'but,' said she, 'I shall be with thee, invisible to all
but thyself.' 'So he went, and the goblin went with him; and when he
saw Angharad, his wife, he saw her a hag like one grown old, but he
retained the recollection of days past, and still felt extreme
affection for her, but he was not able to loose himself from the bond
in which he was. "It is necessary for me," said he, "to part for a
time, I know not how long, from thee, Angharad, and from thee, my son,
Einion," and they wept together, and broke a gold ring between them;
he kept one half and Angharad the other, and they took their leave of
each other, and he went with the Lady of the Wood, and knew not where;
for a powerful illusion was upon him, and he saw not any place, or
person, or object under its true and proper appearance, excepting the
half of the ring alone. And after being a long time, he knew not how
long, with the goblin, the Lady of the Wood, he looked one morning as
the sun was rising upon the half of the ring, and he bethought him to
place it in the most precious place he could, and he resolved to put
it under his eyelid; and as he was endeavouring to do so, he could see
a man in white apparel, and mounted on a snow-white horse, coming
towards him, and that person asked him what he did there; and he told
him that he was cherishing an afflicting remembrance of his wife
Angharad. "Dost thou desire to see her?" said the man in white. "I
do," said Einion, "above all things, and all happiness of the world."
"If so," said the man in white, "get upon this horse, behind me;" and
that Einion did, and looking around he could not see any appearance of
the Lady of the Wood, the goblin, excepting the track of hoofs of
marvellous and monstrous size, as if journeying towards the north.
"What delusion art thou under?" said the man in white. Then Einion
answered him and told everything how it occurred 'twixt him and the
goblin. "Take this white staff in thy hand," said the man in white,
and Einion took it. And the man in white told him to desire whatever
he wished for. The first thing he desired was to see the Lady of the
Wood, for he was not yet completely delivered from the illusion. And
then she appeared to him in size a hideous and monstrous witch, a
thousand times more repulsive of aspect than the most frightful things
seen upon earth. And Einion uttered a cry of terror; and the man in
white cast his cloak over Einion, and in less than a twinkling Einion
alighted as he wished on the hill of Treveilir, by his own house,
where he knew scarcely any one, nor did any one know him.' The goblin
meantime had gone to Einion's wife, in the disguise of a richly
apparelled knight, and made love to her, pretending that her husband
was dead. 'And the illusion fell upon her; and seeing that she should
become a noble lady, higher than any in Wales, she named a day for her
marriage with him. And there was a great preparation of every elegant
and sumptuous apparel, and of meats and drinks, and of every
honourable guest, and every excellence of song and string, and every
preparation of banquet and festive entertainment.' Now there was a
beautiful harp in Angharad's room, which the goblin knight desired
should be played on; 'and the harpers present, the best in Wales,
tried to put it in tune, and were not able.' But Einion presented
himself at the house, and offered to play on it. Angharad, being under
an illusion, 'saw him as an old, decrepit, withered, grey-haired man,
stooping with age, and dressed in rags.' Einion tuned the harp, 'and
played on it the air which Angharad loved. And she marvelled
exceedingly, and asked him who he was. And he answered in song: ...
"Einion the golden-hearted." ...

              "Where hast thou been!"
    "In Kent, in Gwent, in the wood, in Monmouth,
        In Maenol, Gorwenydd;
     And in the valley of Gwyn, the son of Nudd;
        See, the bright gold is the token."

And he gave her the ring.

    "Look not on the whitened hue of my hair,
      Where once my aspect was spirited and bold;
    Now gray, without disguise, where once it was yellow.
    Never was Angharad out of my remembrance,
      But Einion was by thee forgotten."'

But Angharad 'could not bring him to her recollection. Then said he to
the guests:

    "If I have lost her whom I loved, the fair one of polished mind,
      The daughter of Ednyved Vychan,
    I have not lost (so get you out!)
      Either my bed, or my house, or my fire."

'And upon that he placed the white staff in Angharad's hand, and
instantly the goblin which she had hitherto seen as a handsome and
honourable nobleman, appeared to her as a monster, inconceivably
hideous; and she fainted from fear, and Einion supported her until she
revived. And when she opened her eyes, she saw there neither the
goblin, nor any of the guests, nor of the minstrels, nor anything
whatever except Einion, and her son, and the harp, and the house in
its domestic arrangement, and the dinner on the table, casting its
savoury odour around. And they sat down to eat ... and exceeding great
was their enjoyment. And they saw the illusion which the demoniacal
goblin had cast over them.... And thus it ends.'[81]

FOOTNOTE:

[81] Iolo MSS. 587, et seq.

