VI.

Where accounts of the devil's appearance are so numerous, it is
perhaps somewhat surprising so little is heard of apparitions of
angels. There are reasons for this, however, which might be enlarged
upon. Tradition says that 'in former times' there were frequent visits
of angels to Wales; and their rare appearance in our days is ascribed
to the completion of revelation. One or two modern instances of
angelic visitation are given by the Prophet Jones. There was David
Thomas, who lived at a place called the Pantau, between the towns of
Carmarthen and Laugharne; he was 'a gifted brother, who sometimes
preached,' in the dissenting way. One night, when he was at prayer
alone in a room which stood apart from his house, there was suddenly a
great light present, which made the light of the candle no longer
visible. And in that light appeared a band of angels, like children,
very beautiful in bright clothing, singing in Welsh these words:

    Pa hyd? Pa hyd? Dychwelwch feibion Adda!
    Pa hyd? Pa hyd yr erlidiwch y Cristnogion duwiol?

    How long? How long? Return ye sons of Adam!
    How long? How long will ye persecute the godly Christians?

After a time they departed; reappeared; departed again; the great
light faded; and the light of Mr. Thomas's candle was once more
visible on his table. There was also Rees David, a man of more than
common piety, who lived in Carmarthenshire, near Whitlands. At the
time of his death, it was testified by 'several religious persons who
were in the room,' that there was heard, by them and by the dying man,
the singing of angels. It drew nearer and nearer as his death-struggle
grew imminent, and after his death they 'heard the pleasant
incomparable singing gradually depart, until it was out of hearing.'

That the dying do see something more, in the last moment of expiring
nature, than it is given to living eyes to see, is a cherished belief
by numberless Christian men and women, whom to suspect of
superstitious credulity were to grossly offend. This belief is based
on exclamations uttered by the dying, while with fixed and staring
eyes they appeared to gaze intently at some object not visible to the
bystanders. But that the bystanders also saw, or heard, voice or
vision from the Unknown, is not often pretended.

