VII.

Reference has been made to the euphemisms in use among all peoples to
avoid pronouncing the name of the devil. That many good folk still
consider the word devil, lightly spoken, a profane utterance only
second to a similar utterance of God's name, is a curious survival of
old superstitions. No prohibition of this sort attaches to the words
demon, fiend, etc., nor to such euphemisms, common in both Welsh and
English, as the adversary, the evil one, etc. It is an old custom in
North Wales to spit at the name of the devil, even when so innocently
used as in pronouncing the name of the Devil's Bridge. The peasantry
prefer to call the bridge 'Pont y Gwr Drwg,' the Bridge of the Wicked
One; and spitting and wiping off the tongue are deemed a necessary
precaution after saying devil, diafol, or diawl. The phrase 'I hope to
goodness,' so common in Wales and elsewhere, is clearly but another
euphemism for God; the goodness meant is the Divine beneficence.
'Goodness' sake' is but a contraction of 'For God's sake!' The Hebrew
tetragrammaton which was invested with such terror, as representing
the great 'I am,' finds an explanation, according to the ideas of
Welsh scholars, in the Bardic traditions. These relate that, by the
utterance of His Name, God created this world; the Name being
represented by the symbol /|\, three lines which typify the focusing
of the rising sun's rays at the equinoxes and solstices. The first ray
is the Creator, the second the Preserver, and the third the Destroyer;
the whole are God's Name. This name cannot be uttered by a mortal; he
has not the power; therefore it remains for ever unuttered on earth.
At the creation the universe uttered it in joy at the new-born world;
'the morning stars sang together.' At the last day it will be uttered
again. Till then it is kept a secret, lest it be degraded, as it has
been by the Hindus, who, from the three rays created their three false
gods, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. Tradition relates that Einigan Gawr
saw the Divine Name appear, and inscribed it on three rods of mountain
ash. The people mistook the three rods thus inscribed for God himself,
and Einigan died from grief at their error.[87]

FOOTNOTE:

[87] 'Dosparth Edeyrn Dafod Aur,' 3.

