V.

A death-portent which is often confused with the Gwrach y Rhibyn, yet
which is rendered quite distinct by its special attributes, is the
Cyhyraeth. This is a groaning spirit. It is never seen, but the noise
it makes is no less terrible to the ear than the appearance of its
visible sister is to the eye. Among groaning spirits it is considered
to be the chief. The Prophet Jones succinctly characterises it as 'a
doleful, dreadful noise in the night, before a burying.' David
Prosser, of Llanybyther parish, 'a sober, sensible man and careful to
tell the truth,' once heard the Cyhyraeth in the early part of the
night, his wife and maid-servant being together in the house, and also
hearing it; and when it came opposite the window, it 'pronounced these
strange words, of no signification that we know of,' viz. '_Woolach!
Woolach!_' Some time afterward a funeral passed that way. The
judicious Joshua Coslet, who lived by the river Towy in
Carmarthenshire, testified that the Cyhyraeth is often heard there,
and that it is 'a doleful, disagreeable sound heard before the deaths
of many, and most apt to be heard before foul weather. The voice
resembles the groaning of sick persons who are to die; heard at first
at a distance, then comes nearer, and the last near at hand; so that
it is a threefold warning of death. It begins strong, and louder than
a sick man can make; the second cry is lower, but not less doleful,
but rather more so; the third yet lower, and soft, like the groaning
of a sick man almost spent and dying.' A person 'well remembering the
voice' and coming to the sick man's bed, 'shall hear his groans
exactly like' those which he had before heard from the Cyhyraeth. This
crying spirit especially affected the twelve parishes in the hundred
of Inis Cenin, which lie on the south-east side of the river Towy,
'where some time past it groaned before the death of every person who
lived that side of the country.' It also sounded before the death of
persons 'who were born in these parishes, but died elsewhere.'
Sometimes the voice is heard long before death, but not longer than
three quarters of a year. So common was it in the district named, that
among the people there a familiar form of reproach to any one making a
disagreeable noise, or 'children crying or groaning unreasonable,' was
to ejaculate, 'Oh 'r Cyhyraeth!' A reason why the Cyhyraeth was more
often heard in the hundred of Inis Cenin was thought to be that Non,
the mother of St. David, lived in those parts, where a village is
called after her name, Llan-non, the church of Non.

On the southern sea-coast, in Glamorganshire, the Cyhyraeth is
sometimes heard by the people in the villages on shore passing down
the channel with loud moans, while those dismal lights which forebode
a wreck are seen playing along the waves. Watchers by the sea-shore
have also heard its moan far out on the ocean, gradually drawing
nearer and nearer, and then dying away; and when they thought it gone
it has suddenly shrieked close to their startled ears, chilling their
very marrows. Then, long after, they would hear it, now faint, now
loud, going along the sands into the distant darkness. One or more
corpses were usually washed ashore soon after. In the villages the
Cyhyraeth is heard passing through the empty streets and lanes by
night, groaning dismally, sometimes rattling the window-shutters, or
flinging open the door as it flits by. When going along the country
lanes it will thus horrify the inmates of every house it passes. Some
old people say it is only heard before the death of such as are of
strayed mind, or who have long been ill; but it always comes when an
epidemic is about to visit the neighbourhood.

A tradition of the Cyhyraeth is connected with the parish churchyard
at St. Mellons, a quaint old-fashioned village within easy tramping
distance of Cardiff, but in Monmouthshire. It is of a boy who was sent
on an errand, and who heard the Cyhyraeth crying in the churchyard,
first in one place, then in another, and finally in a third place,
where it rested. Some time after, a corpse was brought to that
churchyard to be buried, but some person came and claimed the grave.
They went to another place, but that also was claimed. Then they went
to a third place, and there they were allowed to bury their dead in
peace. And this going about with the corpse was 'just the same as the
boy declared it.' Of course the boy could not know what was to come to
pass, 'but this crying spirit knew exactly what would come to pass.' I
was also told by a person at St. Mellons that a ghost had been seen
sitting upon the old stone cross which stands on the hillside near the
church.

