VI.

Other groaning spirits are sometimes heard. A girl named Mary Morgan,
living near Crumlyn Bridge, while standing on the bridge one evening
was seized with mortal terror on hearing a groaning voice going up the
river, uttering the words, 'O Dduw, beth a wnaf fi?' (O God, what
shall I do?) many times repeated, amid direful groans. The conclusion
of this narration is a hopeless mystery, as Mary fainted away with her
fright.

Much more satisfactory, as a ghost-story with a moral, is the tale of
the groaning spirit of Bedwellty.[99] There was one night a wake at
the house of Meredith Thomas, over the body of his four-year-old
child, at which two profane men (named Thomas Edward Morgan and
Anthony Aaron) began playing at cards, and swearing most horribly. In
the parish of Bedwellty, the wakes--or watch-nights, as they are more
commonly called in Wales--were at that time very profanely kept. 'Few
besides the dissenters,' says Jones (who was himself a dissenter, it
must be remembered), 'had the sense and courage to forbid' this
wickedness, but 'suffered it as a custom, because the pretence was to
divert the relations of the dead, and lessen their sorrows.' While the
aforementioned profane men were playing cards and swearing, suddenly a
dismal groaning noise was heard at the window. At this the company was
much frightened, excepting the card-players, who said 'Pw!' and went
on playing. But to pacify the rest of the company they finally
desisted, and at once the groaning ceased. Soon after they began
playing again, when at once the groaning set up in most lamentable
tones, so that people shuddered; but the profane men again said, 'Pw!
it is some fellow playing tricks to frighten us.' 'No,' said William
Harry Rees, a good man of the Baptist persuasion, 'it is no human
being there groaning, but a spirit,' and again he desired them to give
over. But though they were so bold with their card-playing, these
wicked men had not the hardihood to venture out and see who it was
'playing tricks,' as they called it. However, one of the company said,
'I will go, and take the dogs with me, and see if there be any human
being there.' The groaning still continued. This bold person then
'took the prime staff, and began to call the dogs to go with him;' but
the dogs could not be induced to go out, being in great terror at the
groaning noise, and sought to hide themselves under the stools, and
about the people's feet. In vain they beat the dogs, and kicked and
scolded them, out-door they would not go. This at last convinced the
profane men, and they left off playing, for fear the devil should come
among them. For it was told in other places that people had played
cards till his sulphurous majesty appeared in person.

FOOTNOTE:

[99] Jones, 'Apparitions,' 24.



