III.

In Arthur's day and before that, the people of South Wales regarded
North Wales as pre-eminently the land of faerie. In the popular
imagination, that distant country was the chosen abode of giants,
monsters, magicians, and all the creatures of enchantment. Out of it
came the fairies, on their visits to the sunny land of the south. The
chief philosopher of that enchanted region was a giant who sat on a
mountain peak and watched the stars. It had a wizard monarch called
Gwydion, who possessed the power of changing himself into the
strangest possible forms. The peasant who dwelt on the shores of Dyfed
(Demetia) saw in the distance, beyond the blue waves of the ocean,
shadowy mountain summits piercing the clouds, and guarding this mystic
region in solemn majesty. Thence rolled down upon him the storm-clouds
from the home of the tempest; thence streamed up the winter sky the
flaming banners of the Northern lights; thence rose through the
illimitable darkness on high, the star-strewn pathway of the fairy
king. These details are current in the Mabinogion, those brilliant
stories of Welsh enchantment, so gracefully done into English by Lady
Charlotte Guest,[4] and it is believed that all the Mabinogion in
which these details were found were written in Dyfed. This was the
region on the west, now covered by Pembroke, Carmarthen, and Cardigan
shires.

More recently than the time above indicated, special traditions have
located fairyland in the Vale of Neath, in Glamorganshire. Especially
does a certain steep and rugged crag there, called Craig y Ddinas,
bear a distinctly awful reputation as a stronghold of the fairy
tribe.[5] Its caves and crevices have been their favourite haunt for
many centuries, and upon this rock was held the court of the last
fairies who have ever appeared in Wales. Needless to say there are men
still living who remember the visits of the fairies to Craig y Ddinas,
although they aver the little folk are no longer seen there. It is a
common remark that the Methodists drove them away; indeed, there are
numberless stories which show the fairies to have been animated, when
they were still numerous in Wales, by a cordial antipathy for all
dissenting preachers. In this antipathy, it may be here observed,
teetotallers were included.
