VI.

Of the Teulu, or Goblin Funeral, a death-portent of wide prevalence in
Wales, numberless stories are told. This omen is sometimes a form of
the Tolaeth, but in itself constitutes an omen which is simple and
explicit. A funeral procession is seen passing down the road, and at
the same time it is heard. It has no shadowy goblin aspect, but
appears to be a real funeral. Examination shows its shadowy nature.
Subsequently a real funeral passes the same way, and is recognised as
the fulfilment of the omen. The goblin funeral precedes the other
sometimes by days, sometimes by weeks. Rees Thomas, a carpenter of
Carmarthenshire, passing by night through Rhiw Edwst, near Capel Ywen,
heard a stir as of a procession of people coming towards him, walking
and speaking; and when they were close to him he felt the touch of an
unseen hand upon his shoulder, and a voice saying to him, 'Rhys bach,
pa fodd yr y'ch chwi?' (my dear Rees, how are you?) A month after,
passing that way again, he met a funeral in that very place, and a
woman of the company put her hand upon his shoulder and spoke exactly
the same Welsh words to him that the invisible spirit had spoken. Rev.
Howel Prosser, many years ago curate of Aberystruth, late one evening
saw a funeral procession going down the church lane. Supposing it to
be the funeral of a man who had recently died in the upper part of his
parish, yet wondering he had not been notified of the burial, he put
on his band in order to perform his office over the dead, and hastened
to meet the procession. But when he came to it he saw that it was
composed of strangers, whom he had never seen before. Nevertheless, he
laid his hand on the bier, to help carry the corpse, when instantly
the whole vanished, and he was alone; but in his hand he found the
skull of a dead horse. 'Mr. Prosser was my schoolmaster, and a right
honest man,' says Edmund Jones,[102] who is responsible for this
story, as well as for the ensuing: Isaac William Thomas, who lived not
far from Hafodafel, once met a Goblin Funeral coming down the mountain
toward Llanhiddel church. He stood in a field adjoining the highway,
and leaned against the stone wall. The funeral came close to the other
side of the wall, and as the bier passed him he reached forth his hand
and took off the black veil which was over the bier. This he carried
to his home, where many people saw it. 'It was made of some exceeding
fine stuff, so that when folded it was a very little substance, and
very light.' That he escaped being hurt for this bold act was long the
marvel of the parish; but it was believed, by their going aside to
come so near him, that the goblins were willing he should do as he
did.

An old man who resided near Llanllwch church, in Carmarthenshire, used
to assert in the most solemn manner that he had seen the Teulu going
to church again and again. On a certain evening hearing one
approaching, he peeped over a wall to look at it. The persons
composing the procession were all acquaintances of his, with the
exception of one who stood apart from the rest, gazing mournfully at
them, and who appeared to be a stranger. Soon afterwards there was a
real burying, and the old man, determined to see if there would be in
the scene any resemblance to his last Teulu, went to the churchyard
and waited. When the procession arrived, all were there as he had seen
them, except the stranger. Looking about him curiously, the old man
was startled by the discovery that he was himself the stranger! He was
standing on the identical spot where had stood the man he did not
recognise when he saw the Teulu. It was his own ghost.

FOOTNOTE:

[102] 'Account of the Parish of Aberystruth,' 17.

