VII.

The death portent called Cwn Annwn, or Dogs of Hell, is a pack of
hounds which howl through the air with a voice frightfully
disproportionate to their size, full of a wild sort of lamentation.
There is a tradition that one of them once fell on a tombstone, but no
one was able to secure it. A peculiarity of these creatures is that
the nearer they are to a man the less loud their voice sounds,
resembling then the voice of small beagles, and the farther off they
are the louder is their cry. Sometimes a voice like that of a great
hound is heard sounding among them--a deep hollow voice, as if it were
the voice of a monstrous bloodhound. Although terrible to hear, and
certain portents of death, they are in themselves harmless. 'They have
never been known,' says a most respectable authority,[103] 'to commit
any mischief on the persons of either man or woman, goat, sheep, or
cow.' Sometimes they are called Cwn y Wybr, or Dogs of the Sky, but
the more sulphurous name is the favourite one. They are also
sometimes called Dogs of the Fairies. Their origin in fairyland is
traced to the famous mabinogi of Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed; but in that
fascinating tale of enchantment their right to be called Cwn Annwn is
clearly set forth, for they are there the hounds of a King of Annwn.
There are several translations of this mabinogi in existence, and its
popularity in South Wales is great, for the villages, vales, and
streams mentioned in it are familiar to residents in Pembroke,
Carmarthen, and Cardigan shires. Pwyll, the Prince, was at Narberth,
where was his chief palace, when he went one day to a wood in Glyn
Cych. Here 'he sounded his horn and began to enter upon the chase,
following his dogs and separating from his companions. And as he was
listening to the cry of his pack, he could distinctly hear the cry of
another pack, different from that of his own, and which was coming in
an opposite direction. He could also discern an opening in the woods
towards a level plain; and as his pack was entering the skirt of the
opening he perceived a stag before the other pack, and about the
middle of the glade the pack in the rear coming up and throwing the
stag on the ground. Upon this he fixed his attention on the colour of
the pack, without recollecting to look at the stag: and of all the
hounds in the world he had ever seen he never saw any like them in
colour. Their colour was a shining clear white, with red ears; and the
whiteness of the dogs and the redness of their ears were equally
conspicuous.'[104] They were the hounds of Arawn, a crowned king in
the land of Annwn, the shadow-land of Hades.

The Cwn Annwn are sometimes held to be the hell-hounds which hunt
through the air the soul of the wicked man, the instant it quits the
body--a truly terrific idea to the vulgar mind. The Prophet Jones has
several accounts of them: Thomas Phillips, of Trelech parish, heard
them with the voice of the great dog sounding among them, and noticed
that they followed a course that was never followed by funerals, which
surprised him very much, as he had always heard that the Dogs of the
Sky invariably went the same way that the corpse was to follow. Not
long after a woman from an adjoining parish died at Trelech, and being
carried to her own parish church to be buried, her corpse did actually
pass the same way in which the spirit dogs had been heard to hunt.
Thomas Andrew, of the parish of Llanhiddel, heard them one night as he
was coming home. 'He heard them coming towards him, though he saw them
not.' Their cry grew fainter as they drew near him, passed him, and
louder again as they went from him. They went down the steeps towards
the river Ebwy. And Thomas Andrew was 'a religious man, who would not
have told an untruth for fear or for favour.'
