VIII.

No form of superstition has had a wider popularity than this of
spiritual hunting dogs, with which was usually connected in olden time
the wild huntsman, a personage who has dropped quite out of modern
belief, at least in Wales. In France this goblin was called Le Grand
Veneur, and hunted with his dogs in the forests of Fontainebleau; in
Germany it was Hackelberg, who sold himself to the devil for
permission to hunt till doomsday. In Britain it was King Arthur who
served as the goblin huntsman. Peasants would hear the cry of the
hounds and the sounding of the horns, but the huntsman was invisible.
When they called out after him, however, the answer came back: 'We are
King Arthur and his kindred.' Mr. Baring-Gould,[105] in giving an
account of the myth of Odin, the Wild Huntsman, who rides over the
forests by night on a white horse, with his legion of hell-hounds,
seems to ascribe the superstition to the imagination of a belated
woodcutter frightened by the wind in the tree-tops. William
Henderson[106] presumes the belief in the Wild Huntsman's pack, which
prevails in the North of England, to come from the strange unearthly
cries uttered by wild fowl on their passage southward, and which sound
like the yelping of dogs. These natural phenomena have not served,
however, to keep the old belief alive in Wales.

That the Cwn Annwn are descendants of the wish-hound of Hermes, hardly
admits of doubt. The same superstition prevails among all Aryan
peoples, with details differing but little. The souls of the dying are
carried away by the howling winds, the dogs of Hermes, in the ancient
mythology as in surviving beliefs; on this follows the custom of
opening the windows at death, so that the released soul may escape. In
Devonshire they say no soul can escape from the house in which its
body dies, unless all the locks and bolts are opened. In China a hole
is made in the roof for a like purpose. The early Aryan conception of
the wind as a howling dog or wolf speeding over the house-tops caused
the inmates to tremble with fear, lest their souls should be called to
follow them. It must be constantly borne in mind that all these
creatures of fancy were more or less interchangeable, and the god
Hermes was at times his own dog, which escorted the soul to the river
Styx. The winds were now the maruts, or spirits of the breeze, serving
Indra, the sky-god; again they were the great psychopomp himself. The
peasant who to-day tells you that dogs can see death enter the house
where a person is about to die, merely repeats the idea of a primeval
man whose ignorance of physical science was complete.
