II.

Among the accounts of the Corpse Candle which have come under my
notice none are more interesting than those given me by a good dame
whom I encountered at Caerau, near Cardiff. Caerau is a little village
of perhaps one hundred souls, crouched at the foot of a steep hill on
whose summit are the ancient earthworks of a Roman camp. On this
summit also stands the parish church, distinctly visible from Cardiff
streets, so ponderous is its square tower against the sky. To walk
there is a pleasant stroll from the late Marquis of Bute's statue in
the centre of the seaport town. I am thus particular merely for
emphasis of the fact that this superstition is not confined to remote
and out-of-the-way districts. Caerau is rural, and its people are all
poor people, perhaps; but its church is barely three miles from the
heart of a busy seaport. In this church I met the voluble Welshwoman
who gave me the accounts referred to. One was to this effect: One
night her sister was lying very ill at the narrator's house, and she
was alone with her children, her husband being in the lunatic asylum
at Cardiff. She had just put the children to bed, and had set her
candle on the floor preparatory to going to bed herself, when there
came a 'swish' along the floor, like the rustling of grave-clothes,
and the candle was blown out. The room, however, to her surprise,
remained glowing with a feeble light as from a very small taper, and
looking behind her she beheld 'old John Richards,' who had been dead
ten years. He held a Corpse Candle in his hand, and he looked at her
in a chill and steadfast manner which caused the blood to run cold in
her veins. She turned and woke her eldest boy, and said to him, 'Don't
you see old John Richards?' The boy asked 'Where?' rubbing his eyes.
She pointed out the ghost, and the boy was so frightened at sight of
it that he cried out 'O wi! O Dduw! I wish I may die!' The ghost then
disappeared, the Corpse Candle in its hand; the candle on the floor
burned again with a clear light, and the next day the sick sister
died.

Another account ran somewhat thus: The narrator's mother-in-law was
ill with a cancer of the breast. 'Jenny fach,' she said to the
narrator one night, 'sleep by me--I feel afraid.' 'Hach!' said Jenny,
thinking the old woman was foolishly nervous; but she stayed. As she
was lying in bed by the side of her mother-in-law, she saw at the foot
of the bed the faint flame of a Corpse Candle, which shed no light at
all about the room; the place remained as dark as it was before. She
looked at it in a sort of stupor for a short time, and then raised
herself slowly up in bed and reached out to see if she could grasp the
candle. Her fingers touched it, but it immediately went out in a
little shower of pale sparkles that fell downward. At that moment her
mother-in-law uttered a groan, and expired.

'Do you know Thomas Mathews, sir?' she asked me; 'he lives at Crwys
now, but he used to live here at Caerau.' 'Crwys?' I repeated, not at
once comprehending. 'Oh, you must know Crwys, sir; it's just the other
side of Cardiff, towards Newport.' 'Can you spell it for me?'[108] The
woman blushed. ''Deed, sir,' said she, 'I ought to be a scholar, but
I've had so much trouble with my old man that I've quite forgot my
spellin'.' However, the story of Thomas Mathews was to the effect that
he saw a Corpse Candle come out of his father's mouth and go to his
feet, and away a bit, then back again to the mouth, which it did not
exactly enter, but blended as it were with the sick man's body. I
asked if the candle was tallow at any point in its excursion, to which
I was gravely answered that it was the spirit of tallow. The man died
not long after, in the presence of my informant, who described the
incident with a dramatic force and fervour peculiarly Celtic,
concluding with the remark: 'Well, well, there's only one way to come
into the world, but there's a many ways to go out of it.'

The light issuing from the mouth is a fancy frequently encountered. In
the 'Liber Landavensis' it is mentioned that one day as St. Samson was
celebrating the holy mysteries, St. Dubricius with two monks saw a
stream of fire to proceed glittering from his mouth.[109] In old
woodcuts, the souls of the dying are represented as issuing from the
mouth in the form of small human figures; and the Tyrolese peasants
still fancy the soul is seen coming out of the mouth of a dying man
like a little white cloud.[110] From the mouth of a patient in a London
hospital some time since the nurses observed issuing a pale bluish
flame, and soon after the man died. The frightened nurses--not being
acquainted with the corpse-candle theory of such things--imagined the
torments of hell had already begun in the still living body. A
scientific explanation of the phenomenon ascribed it to phosphuretted
hydrogen, a result of incipient decomposition.[111]
