IV.

The sovereign of the fairies, and their especial guardian and
protector, was one Gwyn ap Nudd. He was also ruler over the goblin
tribe in general. His name often occurs in ancient Welsh poetry. An
old bard of the fourteenth century, who, led away by the fairies, rode
into a turf bog on a mountain one dark night, called it the 'fish-pond
of Gwyn ap Nudd, a palace for goblins and their tribe.' The
association of this legendary character with the goblin fame of the
Vale of Neath will appear, when it is mentioned that Nudd in Welsh is
pronounced simply Neath, and not otherwise. As for the fairy queen,
she does not seem to have any existence among Cambrian goblins. It is
nevertheless thought by Cambrian etymologists, that Morgana is derived
from Mor Gwyn, the white maid; and the Welsh proper name Morgan can
hardly fail to be mentioned in this connection, though it is not
necessarily significant.

The legend of St. Collen, in which Gwyn ap Nudd figures, represents
him as king of Annwn (hell, or the shadow land) as well as of the
fairies.[6] Collen was passing a period of mortification as a hermit,
in a cell under a rock on a mountain. There he one day overheard two
men talking about Gwyn ap Nudd, and giving him this twofold kingly
character. Collen cried out to the men to go away and hold their
tongues, instead of talking about devils. For this Collen was rebuked,
as the king of fairyland had an objection to such language. The saint
was summoned to meet the king on the hill-top at noon, and after
repeated refusals, he finally went there; but he carried a flask of
holy water with him. 'And when he came there he saw the fairest castle
he had ever beheld, and around it the best appointed troops, and
numbers of minstrels and every kind of music of voice and string, and
steeds with youths upon them, the comeliest in the world, and maidens
of elegant aspect, sprightly, light of foot, of graceful apparel, and
in the bloom of youth; and every magnificence becoming the court of a
puissant sovereign. And he beheld a courteous man on the top of the
castle who bade him enter, saying that the king was waiting for him to
come to meat. And Collen went into the castle, and when he came there
the king was sitting in a golden chair. And he welcomed Collen
honourably, and desired him to eat, assuring him that besides what he
saw, he should have the most luxurious of every dainty and delicacy
that the mind could desire, and should be supplied with every drink
and liquor that the heart could wish; and that there should be in
readiness for him every luxury of courtesy and service, of banquet and
of honourable entertainment, of rank and of presents, and every
respect and welcome due to a man of his wisdom. "I will not eat the
leaves of the trees," said Collen. "Didst thou ever see men of better
equipment than these of red and blue?" asked the king. "Their
equipment is good enough," said Collen, "for such equipment as it is."
"What kind of equipment is that?" said the king. Then said Collen,
"The red on the one part signifies burning, and the blue on the other
signifies coldness." And with that Collen drew out his flask and threw
the holy water on their heads, whereupon they vanished from his sight,
so that there was neither castle nor troops, nor men, nor maidens, nor
music, nor song, nor steeds, nor youths, nor banquet, nor the
appearance of anything whatever but the green hillocks.'

FOOTNOTE:

[6] 'Greal' (8vo. London, 1805), p. 337.

