IV.

Morris Griffith was once schoolmaster in the parish of Pontfaen, in
Pembrokeshire, but subsequently became a Baptist preacher of the
Gospel. He tells this story: 'As I was coming from a place called
Tre-Davydd, and was come to the top of the hill, I saw a great light
down in the valley, which I wondered at; for I could not imagine what
it meant. But it came to my mind that it was a light before a burying,
though I never could believe before that there was such a thing. The
light which I saw then was a very red light, and it stood still for
about a quarter of an hour in the way which went towards
Llanferch-Llawddog church. I made haste to the other side of the hill,
that I might see it farther; and from thence I saw it go along to the
churchyard, where it stood still for a little time and entered into
the church. I remained waiting to see it come out, and it was not long
before it came out, and went to a certain part of the churchyard,
where it stood a little time, and then vanished out of my sight. A few
days afterwards, being in school with the children about noon, I heard
a great noise overhead, as if the top of the house was coming down. I
ran out to see the garret, and there was nothing amiss. A few days
afterwards, Mr. Higgon of Pontfaen's son died. When the carpenter came
to fetch the boards to make the coffin, (which were in the garret,) he
made exactly such a stir, in handling the boards in the garret, as was
made before by some spirit, who foreknew the death that was soon to
come to pass. In carrying the body to the grave, the burying stood
where the light had stood for about a quarter of an hour, because
there was some water crossing the way, and the people could not go
over it without wetting their feet, therefore they were obliged to
wait till those that had boots helped them over. The child was buried
in that very spot of ground in the churchyard, where I saw the light
stop after it came out of the church. This is what I can boldly
testify, having seen and heard what I relate--a thing which before I
could not believe.'

Joshua Coslet, before mentioned in these pages, suddenly met a Corpse
Candle as he was going through Heol Bwlch y Gwynt, (Windgap Lane) in
Llandilo Fawr parish. It was a small light when near him, but
increased as it went farther from him. He could easily see that there
was some dark shadow passing along with the candle, and the shadow of
a man carried it, holding it 'between his three forefingers over
against his face.' He might perhaps have seen more, but he was afraid
to look too earnestly upon it. Not long after, a burying passed
through Heol Bwlch y Gwynt. Another time he saw the likeness of a
candle carried in a skull. 'There is nothing unlikely or unreasonable
in either of these representations,' says the Prophet Jones, their
historian.

A Carmarthenshire tradition relates that one day, when the coach which
runs between Llandilo and Carmarthen was passing by Golden Grove, the
property of the Earl of Cawdor, three Corpse Candles were observed on
the surface of the water gliding down the stream which runs near the
road. All the passengers saw them. A few days after, some men were
about crossing the river near there in a coracle, when one of them
expressed his fear at venturing, as the river was flooded, and he
remained behind. Thus the fatal number crossed the river--three--three
Corpse Candles having foretold their fate; and all were drowned.

