V.

Tradition ascribes the origin of all these death-portents to the
efforts of St. David. This saint appears to have been a great and
good man, and a zealous Catholic, who, as a contemporary of the
historical Arthur, is far enough back in the dim past to meet the
views of romantic minds. And a prelate who by his prayers and presence
could enable King Arthur to overthrow the Saxons in battle, or who by
his pious learning could single-handed put down the Pelagian heresy in
the Cardiganshire synod, was surely strong enough to invoke the Gwrach
y Rhibyn, the Cyhyraeth, the Corpse Candle, and all the dreadful
brood. This the legend relates he did by a special appeal to Heaven.
Observing that the people in general were careless of the life to
come, and could not be brought to mind it, and make preparation for
it, St. David prayed that Heaven would give a sign of the immortality
of the soul, and of a life to come, by a presage of death. Since that
day, Wales, and particularly that part of Wales included in the
bishopric of St. David, has had these phantoms. More materialistic
minds consider these portents to be a remainder of those practices by
which the persecuted Druids performed their rites and long kept up
their religion in the land which Christianity had claimed: a similar
origin, in fact, is here found for goblin omens as for fairies.

That these various portents are extensively believed in at the present
day there cannot be a doubt; with regard to the most important of
them, I am able to testify with the fullest freedom; I have heard
regarding them story after story, from the lips of narrators whose
sincerity was expressed vividly in face, tones, and behaviour. The
excited eye, the paling cheek, the bated breath, the sinking voice,
the intense and absorbed manner--familiar phenomena in every circle
where ghost stories are told--evidenced the perfect sincerity, at
least, of the speakers.

It is unnecessary here to repeat, what I for my own part never forget,
nor, I trust, does the reader, that Wales is no exception to the rest
of the world in its credulity. That it is more picturesque is true,
and it is also true that there is here an unusual amount of legend
which has not hitherto found its way into books. Death-omens are
common to all lands; even in America, there are tales of the banshee,
imported from Ireland along with the sons of that soil. In one recent
case which came under my notice the banshee belonged to a
Cambridgeshire Englishman. This was at Evansville, Indiana, and the
banshee had appeared before the deaths of five members of a family,
the last of whom was the father. His name was Feast, and the
circumstances attending the banshee's visits were gravely described in
a local journal as a matter of news. Less distinguished death-portents
are common enough in the United States. That the Cambrian portents are
so picturesque and clearly defined must be considered strong testimony
to the vivid imagination of the Welsh. Figures born of the fancy, as
distinguished from creatures born of the flesh, prove their parentage
by the vagueness of their outlines. The outlines of the Cyhyraeth and
the Gwrach y Rhibyn sometimes run into and mingle with each other, and
so do those of the Tolaeth and the Goblin Funeral; but the wonder is
they are such distinct entities as they are.

