I.

Numberless customs in Wales which appear to be meaningless, to people
of average culture, are in truth replete with meaning. However trivial
they may seem, they are very seldom the offspring of mere fooling. The
student of comparative folk-lore is often able to trace their origin
with surprising distinctness, and to evolve from them a significance
before unsuspected. In many cases these quaint old customs are traced
to the primeval mythology. Others are clearly seen to be of Druidical
origin. Many spring from the rites and observances of the Roman
Catholic Church in the early days of Christianity on Welsh
soil--where, as is now generally conceded, the Gospel was first
preached in Great Britain. Some embody historical traditions; and some
are the outgrowth of peculiar states of society in medieval times.
Directly or indirectly, they are all associated with superstition,
though in many instances they have quite lost any superstitious
character in our day.

Modern society is agreed, with respect to many curious old customs, to
view them as the peculiar possession of ignorance. It is very
instructive to note, in this connection, how blandly we accept some of
the most superstitious of these usages, with tacit approval, and
permit them to govern our conduct. In every civilised community, in
every enlightened land on earth, there are many men and women to whom
this remark applies, who would deem themselves shamefully insulted
should you doubt their intelligence and culture. Men and women who
'smile superior' at the idea of Luther hurling inkstands at the devil,
or at the Welsh peasant who thinks a pig can see the wind, will
themselves avoid beginning a journey on a Friday, view as ominous a
rainy wedding-day, throw an old slipper after a bride for luck,
observe with interest the portents of their nightly dreams, shun
seeing the new moon over the left shoulder, throw a pinch of salt over
the same member when the salt-cellar is upset, tie a red string about
the neck to cure nose-bleed, and believe in the antics of the modern
spiritualistic 'control.' Superstition, however, they leave to the
ignorant! The examples of every-day fetichism here cited are familiar
to us, not specially among the Welsh, but among the English also, and
the people of the United States--who, I may again observe, are no
doubt as a people uncommonly free from superstition, in comparison
with the older nations of the earth; but modesty is a very becoming
wear for us all, in examining into other people's superstitions.

Aside from their scientific interest, there is a charm about many of
the quaint customs of the Welsh, which speaks eloquently to most
hearts. They are the offspring of ignorance, true, but they touch the
'good old times' of the poet and the romancer, when the conditions of
life were less harsh than now. So we love to think. As a matter of
scientific truth, this idea is itself, alas! but a superstition. This
world has probably never been so fair a place to live in, life never
so free from harsh conditions, as now; and as time goes on, there can
be no doubt the improving process will continue. The true halcyon days
of man are to be looked for in the future--not in the past; but with
that future we shall have no mortal part.

