II.

In treating of customs, no other classification is needful than their
arrangement in orderly sequence in two divisions: first, those which
pertain to certain days and seasons; second, those relating to the
most conspicuous events in common human life, courtship, marriage, and
death.

Beginning with the year: there is in Glamorganshire a New Year's Day
custom of great antiquity and large present observance, called the
apple gift, or New Year's gift. In every town and village you will
encounter children, on and about New Year's Day, going from door to
door of shops and houses, bearing an apple or an orange curiously
tricked out. Three sticks in the form of a tripod are thrust into it
to serve as a rest; its sides are smeared with flour or meal, and
stuck over with oats or wheat, or bits of broken lucifer matches to
represent oats; its top is covered with thyme or other sweet
evergreen, and a skewer is inserted in one side as a handle to hold it
by. In its perfection, this piece of work is elaborate; but it is now
often a decrepit affair, in the larger towns, where the New Year is
welcomed (as at Cardiff) by a midnight chorus of steam-whistles.

  [Illustration: THE NEW YEAR'S APPLE.]

The Christian symbolism of this custom is supposed to relate to the
offering, by the Wise Men, of gold, frankincense, and myrrh to the
infant Jesus. The older interpretation, however, takes the custom back
to the Druidic days, and makes it a form of the solar myth. In the
three supporting sticks of the apple are seen the three rays of the
sun, /|\, the mystic Name of the Creator; the apple is the round sun
itself; the evergreens represent its perennial life; and the grains of
wheat, or oats, Avagddu's spears. Avagddu is the evil principle of
darkness--hell, or the devil--with which the sun fights throughout the
winter for the world's life.

Thousands of children in Wales seek to win from their elders a New
Year's copper by exhibiting the apple gift, or by singing in chorus
their good wishes. A popular verse on this occasion hopes the hearer
will be blessed with an abundance of money in his pocket and of beer
in his cellar, and draws attention to the singers' thin shoes and the
bad character of the walking. In many cases the juvenile population
parades the street all night, sometimes with noisy fife bands, which
follow the death knell, as it sounds from the old church tower, with
shrill peals of a merrier if not more musical sort.

In Pembrokeshire, to rise early on New Year's morning is considered
luck-bringing. On that morning also it is deemed wise to bring a fresh
loaf into the house, with the superstition that the succession of
loaves throughout the year will be influenced by that incident. A
rigid quarantine is also set up, to see that no female visitor cross
the threshold first on New Year's morning; that a male visitor shall
be the first to do so is a lucky thing, and the reverse unlucky. A
superstition resembling this prevails to this day in America among
showmen. 'There's no showman on the road,' said an American manager of
my acquaintance, 'who would think of letting a lady be first to pass
through the doors when opening them for a performance. There's a sort
of feeling that it brings ill-luck. Then there are cross-eyed people;
many a veteran ticket-seller loses all heart when one presents himself
at the ticket-window. A cross-eyed patron and a bad house generally go
together. A cross-eyed performer would be a regular Jonah. With
circuses there is a superstition that a man with a yellow clarionet
brings bad luck.' Another well-known New York manager in a recent
conversation assured me that to open an umbrella in a new play is
deemed certain failure for the piece. An umbrella may be carried
closed with impunity, but it must not be opened unless the author
desire to court failure. The Chinese have the Pembrokeshire
superstition exactly, as regards the first foot on New Year's Day.
They consider a woman peculiarly unlucky as a first foot after the New
Year has begun, but a Buddhist priest is even more unlucky than a
woman, in this light.[113]

Another Pembrokeshire custom on New Year's morning is quaint and
interesting. As soon as it is light, children of the peasantry hasten
to provide a small cup of pure spring water, just from the well, and
go about sprinkling the faces of those they meet, with the aid of a
sprig of evergreen. At the same time they sing the following verses:

    Here we bring new water from the well so clear,
    For to worship God with, this happy new year;
    Sing levy dew, sing levy dew, the water and the wine,
    With seven bright gold wires, and bugles that do shine;
    Sing reign of fair maid, with gold upon her toe;
    Open you the west door and turn the old year go;
    Sing reign of fair maid, with gold upon her chin;
    Open you the east door and let the new year in!

This custom also is still observed extensively. The words 'levy dew'
are deemed an English version of Llef i Dduw, (a cry to God).

A Welsh song sung on New Year's Day, in Glamorganshire, by boys in
chorus, somewhat after the Christmas carol fashion, is this:

    Blwyddyn newydd dda i chwi,
    Gwyliau llawen i chwi,
    Meistr a meistres bob un trwy'r ty,
    Gwyliau llawen i chwi,
    Codwch yn foreu, a rheswch y tan,
    A cherddwch i'r ffynon i ymofyn dwr glan.

    A happy new year to you,
    Merry be your holidays,
    Master and mistress--every one in the house;
    Arise in the morning; bestir the fire,
    And go to the well to fetch fresh water.

FOOTNOTE:

[113] Dennys, 'Folk-Lore of China,' 31.

