IV.

Easter is marked by some striking customs. It is deemed essential for
one's well-being that some new article of dress shall be donned at
this time, though it be nothing more than a new ribbon. This is also a
Hampshire superstition. A servant of mine, born in Hampshire, used
always to say, 'If you don't have on something new Easter Sunday the
dogs will spit at you.' This custom is associated with Easter baptism,
when a new life was assumed by the baptized, clothed in righteousness
as a garment. A ceremony called 'lifting' is peculiar to North Wales
on Easter Monday and Tuesday. On the Monday bands of men go about with
a chair, and meeting a woman in the street compel her to sit, and be
lifted three times in the air amidst their cheers: she is then invited
to bestow a small compliment on her entertainers. This performance is
kept up till twelve o'clock, when it ceases. On Easter Tuesday the
women take their turn, and go about in like manner lifting the men. It
has been conjectured that in this custom an allusion to the
resurrection is intended.

  [Illustration: LIFTING. (_From an old drawing._)]

A custom, the name of which is now lost, was that the village belle
should on Easter Eve and Easter Tuesday carry on her head a piece of
chinaware of curious shape, made expressly for this purpose, and
useless for any other. It may be described as a circular crown of
porcelain, the points whereof were cups and candles. The cups were
solid details of the crown: the candles were stuck with clay upon the
spaces between the cups. The cups were filled with a native beverage
called bragawd, and the candles were lighted. To drink the liquor
without burning yourself or the damsel at the candle was the
difficulty involved in this performance. A stanza was sung by the
young woman's companions, the last line of which was,

    Rhag i'r feinwen losgi ei thalcen.
    (Lest the maiden burn her forehead.[122])

Stocsio is an Easter Monday custom observed from time immemorial in
the town of Aberconwy, and still practised there in 1835. On Easter
Sunday crowds of men and boys carrying wands of gorse went to Pen
Twthil, and there proclaimed the laws and regulations of the following
day. They were to this effect: all men under sixty to be up and out
before 6 A.M.; all under forty, before 4 A.M.; all under twenty, to
stay up all night. Penalty for disobedience: the stocks. The crier who
delivered this proclamation was the man last married in the town
previous to Easter Sunday. Other like rules were proclaimed, amid loud
cheers. Early next morning a party, headed by a fife and drum,
patrolled the town with a cart, in search of delinquents. When one was
discovered, he was hauled from his bed and made to dress himself; then
put in the cart and dragged to the stocks. His feet being secured
therein, he was duly lectured on the sin of laziness, and of breaking
an ancient law of the town by lying abed in violation thereof. His
right hand was then taken, and he was asked a lot of absurd questions,
such as 'Which do you like best, the mistress or the maid?' 'Which do
you prefer, ale or buttermilk?' 'If the gate of a field were open,
would you go through it, or over the stile?' and the like. His answers
being received with derision, his hand was smeared with mud, and he
was then released amid cheers. 'This sport, which would be
impracticable in a larger and less intimate community, is continued
with the greatest good humour until eight; when the rest of the day is
spent in playing ball at the Castle.'[123]
