IV.

All Hallows eve is by the Welsh called 'Nos Calan Gauaf,' meaning 'the
first night of winter;' sometimes, 'Nos Cyn Gauaf,' the 'night before
winter.' It is one of the 'Teir Nos Ysprydnos,' or 'three nights for
spirits,' upon which ghosts walk, fairies are abroad, mysterious
influences are in the air, strange sights are seen, and in short
goblins of every sort are to be with special freedom encountered. They
may be conjured to appear, by certain enchantments, and to give their
visitors glimpses of the future, especially as regards the subject of
marrying. On this night it is customary for the young people,
gathered in many a merry circle, to seek by tricks and charms of
various sort to become acquainted with their future lovers and
sweethearts. Not that it is always necessary to employ such aids, for
on the Teir Nos Ysprydnos the phantoms of future companions have been
known to appear unsummoned. There are many such stories as that of
Thomas Williams, the preacher, who slept in the hills on a Nos
Ysprydnos, and although he used no charms nor tricks of any sort, he
saw his future wife. As he was just about putting out his light,
having jumped into bed, the door opened and the goblin mother of the
young woman he subsequently married walked into the room, leading her
daughter. 'Here, Thomas,' said she, 'I am going, but I leave you
Mary.' And when he came down home out of the mountains he found that
the old mother had died in her bed at the very moment he saw her
goblin. To have done less than marry the girl, after that, would have
been to insult the good old lady's ghost, and cast reflections on the
reputation of All Hallows eve.

The two other spirit-nights, it may here be mentioned, are May-day eve
and Midsummer eve; which with All Hallows were three great festivals
of the ancient Druids, when they commemorated the powers of Nature and
love in the manner which has been alluded to. I have two accounts of
this matter, however, and I know not which is the older in tradition,
as I have both from the mouths of the people; but one account calls
Christmas-night the third spirit-night.

The festivities of All Hallows in Wales are in the main like those of
other Christian lands, in so far as they consist of feasting and
making merry. Bonfires were kindled in many places until recently,
and perhaps are still, in some parts, again in pursuance of the
Druidic rites, which the Christian Church adopted and continued while
changing their significance. In Owen's account of the Bards occurs a
curious description of the autumnal fires kindled in North Wales on
the eve of the first of November, and the attendant ceremonies. There
was running through the fire and smoke, and casting of stones into the
fire, 'all running off at the conclusion to escape from the black
short-tailed sow.'[129] This custom of running through the fire is
said to survive in Ireland. It is no doubt related to the ancient
sacrificial rites. As testimonies to the kinship of our race, all
these customs possess a deep interest, which is increased in this
direction as they lose in the charm of the unique.

On the Welsh Border there prevails a Hallow-e'en custom among the
children of going about to the houses singing the rhymes which follow:

    Wissel wassel, bread and possel,
    Cwrw da, plas yma:
    An apple or a pear, a plum or a cherry,
    Or any good thing to make us merry.

    Sol cakes, sol cakes,
    Pray you, good missus, a sol cake;
    One for Peter, and two for Paul,
    And three for the good man that made us all.

    The roads are very dirty,
      My shoes are very thin,
    I've got a little pocket,
      To put a penny in.
    Up with the kettle and down with the pan,
    Give us an answer and we'll be gan.

    (_A loud rap at the door._)

    _Spoken._ Please to give us a 'apenny.

Some of these rhymes are heard in Glamorganshire and elsewhere at
Christmas and New Year's.

The puzzling jug is a vessel in use in some quarters as a means of
increasing the hilarity of a Hallow-e'en party. It is a stone jug,
'out of which each person is compelled to drink. From the brim,
extending about an inch below the surface, it has holes fantastically
arranged so as to appear like ornamental work, and which are not
perceived except by the perspicacious; three projections, of the size
and shape of marbles, are around the brim, having a hole of the size
of a pea in each; these communicate with the bottom of the jug through
the handle, which is hollow, and has a small hole at the top, which,
with two of the holes being stopped by the fingers, and the mouth
applied to the one nearest the handle, enables one to suck the
contents with ease; but this trick is unknown to every one, and
consequently a stranger generally makes some mistake, perhaps applying
his mouth as he would to another jug, in which case the contents
(generally ale) issue through the fissures on his person, to the no
small diversion of the spectators.'[130]

Another merry custom of All Hallows was--and is--twco am 'falau,
bobbing for apples. A large tub (crwc) is brought into the kitchen of
a farm-house and filled with water; a dozen apples are thrown into it,
and the rustic youths bob for them with their mouths. To catch up two
apples at a single mouthful is a triumphant achievement. Again the
revellers will form a semicircle before the fire, while there depends
above their mouths from a hook in the ceiling, a string with a stick
attached. At one end of the stick is an apple, at the other end a
candle. To snatch the apple with the lips, and yet avoid the candle,
is the aim of the competitors. The stick is so hung that it turns
easily on its axis, and the bobbers often find themselves catching
the candle in their hair while aiming at the apple. This appears to be
a relic of the ancient Welsh game of quintain, or gwyntyn.
