I.

We come now to the most interesting holiday season of the year, by
reason of its almost universality of observance among Christian
peoples, and the variety of customs peculiar to it. In the land of
Arthur and Merlin it is a season of such earnest and widespread
cordiality, such warm enthusiasm, such hearty congratulations between
man and man, that I have been nowhere equally impressed with the
geniality and joyousness of the time. In some Catholic countries one
sees more merriment on the day itself; indeed, the day itself is not
especially merry in Wales, at least in its out-door aspects. It is the
season rather than the day which is merry in Wales. The festival is
usually understood, throughout Christendom, to include twelve days;
the Welsh people not only make much of the twelve days, but they
extend the peculiar festivities of the season far beyond those limits.
Christmas has fairly begun in Wales a week or two before
Christmas-day. The waits are patrolling the streets of Cardiff as
early as December 5th, and Christmas festivals are held as early as
December 19th, at which Christmas-trees are displayed, and their
boughs denuded of the toys and lollipops in which the juvenile heart
delights. After Christmas-day the festival continues I know not just
how long, but apparently for weeks.

The characteristic diversions of the Christmas season are, in the
main, alike in all Christian countries. In Wales many well-known old
customs are retained which in some other parts of Great Britain have
disappeared, such as the mummers, the waits, carols, bell-ringings,
etc. Not only do the bell-ringers of the several churches throughout
the principality do their handsomest on their own particular bells,
but there are grand gatherings, at special points, of all the
bell-ringers for leagues around, who vie with each other in showing
what feats they can perform, how they can astonish you with their
majors, bob-majors, and triple bob-majors, on the brazen clangers of
the steeples. At Cowbridge, for instance, on Christmas will come
together the ringers from Aberdare, Penarth, St. Fagan's, Llantrisant,
Llanblethian, and other places, thirty or forty in number, and after
they have rung till the air above the town is black with flying clefs
and quavers from the steeples, they will all sit down to a jolly
Christmas-dinner at the Bear. The bands of waits, or 'pipers of the
watch,' who wake the echoes of the early morning with their carols,
are heard in every Welsh town and village. In some towns there are
several bands and much good-natured rivalry. The universal love of
music among the Welsh saves the waits from degenerating into the
woe-begone creatures they are in some parts, where the custom has that
poor degree of life which can be kept in it by shivering clusters of
bawling beggars who cannot sing. Regularly organised and trained
choirs of Welshmen perambulate the Cambrian country, chanting carols
at Christmas-tide, and bands of musicians play who, in many cases,
would not discredit the finest military orchestras. Carols are sung in
both Welsh and English; and, generally, the waits are popular. If
their music be not good, they are not tolerated; irate gentlemen
attack them savagely and drive them off. Not exactly that boot-jacks
and empty bottles are thrown at them, but they are excoriated in
'letters to the editor,' in which strong language is hurled at them as
intolerable nuisances, ambulatory disturbers of the night's quiet, and
inflicters of suffering upon the innocent. But such cases are rare.
The music is almost invariably good, and the effect of the soft
strains of melodiously-warbled Welsh coming dreamily to one's ears
through the darkness and distance on a winter morning is sweet and
soothing to most ears. Sometimes small boys will pipe their carols
through the key-holes. The songs vary greatly in character, but
usually the religious tone prevails, as in this case:

    As I sat on a sunny bank, a sunny bank, a sunny bank,
                  All on a Christmas morning,
    Three ships came sailing by, sailing by, sailing by.
                Who do you think was in the ships?
                Who do you think was in the ships?
                  Christ and the Virgin Mary.

Both English and Welsh words are sung. Sometimes a group of young men
and women will be seen dancing about the waits to the measure of their
music, in the hours 'ayont the twal.' In one aspect the Welsh people
may be spoken of as a people whose lives are passed in the indulgence
of their love for music and dancing. The air of Wales seems always
full of music. In the Christmas season there is an unending succession
of concerts and of miscellaneous entertainments of which music forms a
part, while you cannot enter an inn where a few are gathered
together, without the imminent probability that one or more will break
forth in song. By this is not meant a general musical howl, such as is
apt to be evoked from a room full of men of any nationality when
somewhat under the influence of the rosy god, but good set songs, with
good Welsh or English words to them, executed with respect for their
work by the vocalists, and listened to with a like respect by the rest
of the company. When an Englishman is drunk he is belligerent; when a
Frenchman is drunk he is amorous; when an Italian is drunk he is
loquacious; when a Scotchman is drunk he is argumentative; when a
German is drunk he is sleepy; when an American is drunk he brags; and
when a Welshman is drunk he sings. Sometimes he dances; but he does
not do himself credit as a dancer under these circumstances; for when
I speak of dancing I do not refer to those wooden paces and
inflections which pass for dancing in society, and which are little
more than an amiable pretext for bringing in contact human elements
which are slow to mix when planted in chairs about a room: I refer to
the individual dancing of men who do not dance for the purpose of
touching women's hands, or indulging in small talk, but for the
purpose of dancing; and who apply themselves seriously and skilfully
to their work--to wit, the scientific performance of a jig.

I chanced to pass one evening, in the Christmas-time, at a country inn
in a little Carmarthenshire village remote from railways. Certain
wanderings through green lanes (and the lanes were still green,
although it was cold, mid-winter weather) had brought me to the place
at dusk, and, being weary, I had resolved to rest there for the night.
Some local festivity of the season had taken place during the day,
which had drawn into the village an unusual number of farmer-folk from
the immediate neighbourhood. After a simple dinner off a chop and a
half-pint of cwrw da, I strolled into what they called the smoke-room,
by way of distinguishing it from the tap-room adjoining. It was a
plain little apartment, with high-backed wooden settles nearly up to
the ceiling, which gave an old-fashioned air of comfort to the place.
Two or three farmers were sitting there drinking their beer and
smoking their pipes, and toasting their trouserless shins before the
blazing fire. Presently a Welsh harper with his harp entered from
out-doors, and, seating himself in a corner of the room, began to tune
his instrument. The room quickly filled up with men and women, and
though no drinks but beer and 'pop' were indulged in (save that some
of the women drank tea), Bacchus never saw a more genial company. Some
one sang an English song with words like these:

    Thrice welcome, old Christmas, we greet thee again,
    With laughter and innocent mirth in thy train;
    Let joy fill the heart, and shine on the brow,
    While we snatch a sweet kiss 'neath the mistletoe-bough--
            The mistletoe-bough,
            The mistletoe-bough,
    We will snatch a sweet kiss 'neath the mistletoe-bough.

The words are certainly modern, and as certainly not of a high order
of literary merit, but they are extremely characteristic of life at
this season in Wales, where kissing under the mistletoe is a custom
still honoured by observance. There was dancing, too, in this inn
company--performed with stern and determined purpose to excel, by
individuals who could do a jig, and wished to do it well. The harper
played a wild lilting tune; a serious individual who looked like a
school-teacher took off his hat, bowed to the company, jumped into the
middle of the floor, and began to dance like a madman. It was a
strange sight. With a face whose grave earnestness relaxed no whit,
with firmly compressed lips and knitted brow, the serious person
shuffled and double-shuffled, and swung and teetered, and flailed the
floor with his rattling soles, till the perspiration poured in
rivulets down his solemn face. The company was greatly moved;
enthusiastic ejaculations in Welsh and English were heard; shouts of
approbation and encouragement arose; and still the serious person
danced and danced, ending at last with a wonderful pigeon-wing, and
taking his seat exhausted, amid a tremendous roar of applause.

Scenes like this are common throughout Wales at the Christmas-time;
and they contrast strangely with the austerities of religious
observance which are everywhere proceeding. But there is not so wide a
chasm between the two as would exist in some countries. The best
church-members frequently do not deem a little jollity of this sort a
hanging matter, and there are ministers who can do a double-shuffle
themselves if the worst comes to the worst. A worthy pastor in
Glamorganshire related to me, with a suspicious degree of relish, a
story about two ministers who were once riding through a certain
village of Wales on horseback. One was the Rev. Evan Harris, the other
a celebrated old preacher named Shenkin Harry. And, as they rode on,
Harris noticed his companion's legs twitching curiously on his horse's
sides. 'Why, what ails your leg?' he asked. 'Don't you hear the harp,'
was the reply, 'in the public-house yonder? It makes my old toes crazy
for a jig.' But the moral tone of Wales is certainly better, on the
whole, than that of most countries--better even than that of Great
Britain generally, I should say. There is, I know, a prevailing
impression quite to the contrary; but it is utterly absurd. It is an
impression which has grown, I imagine, out of English injustice to
Welshmen in former times, allied to English ignorance in those times
concerning this people. Until within the last hundred years, English
writers habitually wrote of Wales with contempt and even scurrility.
But no one can live in Wales and not form the opinion that the Welsh
are, in truth, an exceptionally moral people; and the nature of their
public entertainments throughout the Christmas-time enforces this
conclusion. Stendhal's declaration that, in true Biblical countries,
religion spoils one day out of seven, destroys the seventh part of
possible happiness, would find strong illustration in Wales. It is not
my purpose to argue whether the illustration would prove or disprove
Stendhal's assertion, though one might fairly ask whether religious
people are not, perhaps, as happy in going to church on Sunday as
irreligious people are in staying away.

