I.

Fairies being creatures of the imagination, it is not possible to
classify them by fixed and immutable rules. In the exact sciences,
there are laws which never vary, or if they vary, their very
eccentricity is governed by precise rules. Even in the largest sense,
comparative mythology must demean itself modestly in order to be
tolerated in the severe company of the sciences. In presenting his
subjects, therefore, the writer in this field can only govern himself
by the purpose of orderly arrangement. To secure the maximum of
system, for the sake of the student who employs the work for reference
and comparison, with the minimum of dullness, for the sake of the
general reader, is perhaps the limit of a reasonable ambition.
Keightley[8] divides into four classes the Scandinavian elements of
popular belief as to fairies, viz.: 1. The Elves; 2. The Dwarfs, or
Trolls; 3. The Nisses; and 4. The Necks, Mermen, and Mermaids. How
entirely arbitrary this division is, the student of Scandinavian
folk-lore at once perceives. Yet it is perhaps as satisfactory as
another. The fairies of Wales may be divided into five classes, if
analogy be not too sharply insisted on. Thus we have, 1. The Ellyllon,
or elves; 2. The Coblynau, or mine fairies; 3. The Bwbachod, or
household fairies; 4. The Gwragedd Annwn, or fairies of the lakes and
streams; and 5. The Gwyllion, or mountain fairies.

The modern Welsh name for fairies is y Tylwyth Teg, the fair folk or
family. This is sometimes lengthened into y Tylwyth Teg yn y Coed, the
fair family in the wood, or Tylwyth Teg y Mwn, the fair folk of the
mine. They are seen dancing in moonlight nights on the velvety grass,
clad in airy and flowing robes of blue, green, white, or
scarlet--details as to colour not usually met, I think, in accounts of
fairies. They are spoken of as bestowing blessings on those mortals
whom they select to be thus favoured; and again are called Bendith y
Mamau, or their mother's blessing, that is to say, good little
children whom it is a pleasure to know. To name the fairies by a harsh
epithet is to invoke their anger; to speak of them in flattering
phrase is to propitiate their good offices. The student of fairy
mythology perceives in this propitiatory mode of speech a fact of wide
significance. It can be traced in numberless lands, and back to the
beginning of human history, among the cloud-hung peaks of Central
Asia. The Greeks spoke of the furies as the Eumenides, or gracious
ones; Highlanders mentioned by Sir Walter Scott uncover to the gibbet
and call it 'the kind gallows;' the Dayak will not name the small-pox,
but calls it 'the chief;' the Laplander calls the bear 'the old man
with the fur coat;' in Ammam the tiger is called 'grandfather;' and it
is thought that the maxim, 'Speak only good of the dead,' came
originally from the notion of propitiating the ghost of the
departed,[9] who, in laying off this mortal garb, had become endowed
with new powers of harming his late acquaintance.
