VI.

The pagan origin of most of our Christmas customs is undoubted. Even
the cheery Christmas-tree is a symbol of heathen rites in times long
antedating Christ. The early Christian fathers, in adopting the
popular usages of their predecessors, and bending them to the service
of Christianity, made wondrous little change in them, beyond the
substitution of new motives and names for the old festivals peculiar
to several seasons of the year. The British Druids' feast of Alban
Arthur, celebrating the new birth of the sun, occurred at our
Christmas time, and is still celebrated at Pontypridd, Glamorganshire,
every year. It begins on the 22nd of December, and lasts three days,
during which period the sun is supposed to fight with Avagddu, the
spirit of darkness, the great luminary having descended into hell for
that purpose. On the third day he rose, and the bards struck their
harps, rejoicing that the sun had again been found. The Pontypridd
ceremonies are similar to those of Midsummer-day, already mentioned.
The Arch-Druid presides in the folds of the serpent circle--when he
can get there, that is, for he is old, past eighty, and the Druidic
hill is apt to be slippery with snow and ice at this time of the year.
He prays to the pagan god, and perhaps chants a poem in Welsh.[133]
The Druidic fires of the winter solstice feast were continued in
customs like that which survived in Herefordshire until recent years,
when on old Christmas-eve thirteen fires were lighted in a cornfield,
twelve of them being in a circle round a central one which burned
higher than the rest. The circle fires were called the Twelve
Apostles, and the central one the Virgin Mary. In a shed near by was a
cow with a plum-cake between or upon her horns, into whose face a pail
of cider was dashed, with a rhyming address, and the cow tossing her
horns from her unexpected baptism naturally threw the plum-cake down.
If it fell forward, good harvests were predicted; if backward, the
omen was evil. A feast among the peasants followed. In the Plygain in
like manner survives the Druidic custom of going to the sacred groves
before dawn on this morning, to greet the rising of the new-born sun
after his struggle with the evil principle.

FOOTNOTE:

[133] I give a free translation of this effort as delivered on Sunday,
December 24th, 1876 (which proved a mild day), and which I find
reported in the 'Western Mail' of the 26th as follows: 'The day of the
winter solstice has dawned upon us; little is the smile and the halo
of Hea. The depth of winter has been reached, but the muse of Wales is
budding still. Cold is the snow on the mountains; naked are the trees,
and the meadows are bare; but while nature is withering the muse of
Wales is budding. When the earth is decked in mourning, and the birds
are silent, the muse of Wales, with its harp, is heard in the gorsedd
of the holy hill. On the stone ark, within the circle of the caldron
of Ceridwen, are throned the sons of Awen; though through their hair
the frozen mist is wafted, their bosoms are sympathetic and they
rejoice. Peace, love, and truth, encircle our throne; throne without a
beginning and without ending, adorned with uchelwydd (mistletoe),
symbol of perennial life. The throne of the British Bard--which
remains a throne while other thrones decay into dust around it: an
everlasting throne! The great wheel of ages revolves and brings around
our festivities; repeating our joys it does perpetually. Muse, awake;
awake, ye harps; let not any part of the year be forgotten wherein to
crown usage (defod), morals (moes), and virtue. The Saviour Hea is
about to be born of the winter solstice. He will rise higher still and
higher shiningly, and we will have again a new year. Haste hail, haste
falling snow, hasten rough storms of winter--hasten away that we may
see the happy evidences of the new year.'



