I.

Welsh courtship is a thorough-going business, early entered upon by
the boys and girls of the Principality; and consequently most Welsh
women marry young. The ancient laws of Howell the Good (died 948)
expressly provided that a woman should be considered marriageable from
fourteen upwards, and should be entitled to maintenance from that age
until the end of her fortieth year; 'that is to say, from fourteen to
forty she ought to be considered in her youth.' By every sort of moral
suasion it is deemed right in Wales to encourage matrimony, and no
where are old bachelors viewed with less forbearance. There used to be
a custom--I know not whether it be extinct now--of expressing the
popular disapprobation for celibacy by planting on the graves of old
bachelors that ill-scented plant, the rue, and sometimes thistles,
nettles, henbane, and other unlovely weeds. The practice was even
extended, most illiberally and unjustly, to the graves of old maids,
who certainly needed no such insult added to their injury. Probably
the custom was never very general, but grew out of similar--but
other-meaning--customs which are still prevalent, and which are very
beautiful. I refer to the planting of graves with significant flowers
in token of the virtues of the dead. Thus where the red rose is
planted on a grave, its tenant is indicated as having been in life a
person of peculiar benevolence of character. The flower specially
planted on the grave of a young virgin is the white rose. There is
also an old custom, at the funeral of a young unmarried person, of
strewing the way to the grave with evergreens and sweet-scented
flowers, and the common saying in connection therewith is that the
dead one is going to his or her marriage-bed. Sad extremely, and
touchingly beautiful, are these customs; but wherever such exist,
there are sure to be ill-conditioned persons who will vent spiteful
feelings by similar means. Hence the occasional affront to the remains
of antiquated single folk, who had been perhaps of a temperament which
rendered them unpopular.

The Welsh being generally of an affectionate disposition, courtship,
as I have said, is a thorough-going business. To any but a people of
the strongest moral and religious tendencies, some of their customs
would prove dangerous in the extreme; but no people so link love and
religion. More of their courting is done while going home from church
than at any other time whatever; and the Welsh Venus is a holy saint,
and not at all a wicked Pagan character like her classic prototype.
'Holy Dwynwen, goddess of love, daughter of Brychan,' had a church
dedicated to her in Anglesea in 590; and for ages her shrine was
resorted to by desponding swains and lovesick maidens. Her
name--_Dwyn_, to carry off, and _wen_, white--signifies the bearer off
of the palm of fairness; and, ruling the court of love while living,
when dead

    A thousand bleeding hearts her power invoked.

Throughout the poetry of the Cymric bards you constantly see the
severest moral precepts, and the purest pictures of virtuous felicity,
mingling in singularly perfect fusion with the most amorous strains.
Among the 'Choice Things' of Geraint, the famous Blue Bard, were:

    A song of ardent love for the lip of a fair maid;
    A softly sweet glance of the eye, and love without wantonness;
    A secluded walking-place to caress one that is fair and slender;
    To reside by the margin of a brook in a tranquil dell of dry soil;
    A house small and warm, fronting the bright sunshine.

With these, versifications of all the virtues and moralities. 'In the
whole range of Kymric poetry,' says the learned Thomas Stephens,[134]
'there is not, I venture to assert, a line of impiety.'

FOOTNOTE:

[134] Vide 'Lit. of the Kymry.'

