III.

The customs of Rhamanta, or romantic divination, by which lovers and
sweethearts seek to pierce the future, are many and curious, in all
parts of Wales. Besides such familiar forms of this widely popular
practice as sleeping on a bit of wedding-cake, etc., several unique
examples may be mentioned. One known as the Maid's Trick is thus
performed; and none must attempt it but true maids, or they will get
themselves into trouble with the fairies: On Christmas eve, or on one
of the Three Spirit Nights, after the old folks are abed, the curious
maiden puts a good stock of coal on the fire, lays a clean cloth on
the table, and spreads thereon such store of eatables and drinkables
as her larder will afford. Toasted cheese is considered an appropriate
luxury for this occasion. Having prepared the feast, the maiden then
takes off all her clothing, piece by piece, standing before the fire
the while, and her last and closest garment she washes in a pail of
clear spring water, on the hearth, and spreads it to dry across a
chair-back turned to the fire. She then goes off to bed, and listens
for her future husband, whose apparition is confidently expected to
come and eat the supper. In case she hears him, she is allowed to peep
into the room, should there be a convenient crack or key-hole for that
purpose; and it is said there be unhappy maids who have believed
themselves doomed to marry a monster, from having seen through a
cranny the horrible spectacle of a black-furred creature with fiery
eyes, its tail lashing its sides, its whiskers dripping gravy, gorging
itself with the supper. But if her lover come, she will be his bride
that same year.

In Pembrokeshire a shoulder of mutton, with nine holes bored in the
blade bone, is put under the pillow to dream on. At the same time the
shoes of the experimenting damsel are placed at the foot of the bed in
the shape of a letter T, and an incantation is said over them, in
which it is trusted by the damsel that she may see her lover in his
every-day clothes.

In Glamorganshire a form of rhamanta still exists which is common in
many lands. A shovel being placed against the fire, on it a boy and a
girl put each a grain of wheat, side by side. Presently these edge
towards each other; they bob and curtsey, or seem to, as they hop
about. They swell and grow hot, and finally pop off the shovel. If
both grains go off together, it is a sign the young pair will jump
together into matrimony; but if they take different directions, or go
off at different times, the omen is unhappy. In Glamorganshire also
this is done: A man gets possession of a girl's garters, and weaves
them into a true lover's knot, saying over them some words of hope and
love in Welsh. This he puts under his shirt, next his heart, till he
goes to bed, when he places it under the bolster. If the test be
successful the vision of his future wife appears to him in the night.

