II.

The Horse-Wedding is of more ancient origin than the Bidding, and is
still a living custom in some parts of Wales, especially
Carmarthenshire and western Glamorganshire. It was in other days
common throughout South Wales, and was scolded about by old Malkin
(generally very cordial in his praise of Welsh customs) in these spicy
terms: 'Ill may it befal the traveller, who has the misfortune of
meeting a Welsh wedding on the road. He would be inclined to suppose
that he had fallen in with a company of lunatics, escaped from their
confinement. It is the custom of the whole party who are invited, both
men and women, to ride full speed to the church porch, and the person
who arrives there first has some privilege or distinction at the
marriage feast. To this important object all inferior considerations
give way; whether the safety of his majesty's subjects, who are not
going to be married, or their own, incessantly endangered by
boisterous, unskilful and contentious jockeyship.'[137] Glamorganshire
is here spoken of. The custom varies somewhat in different localities,
but it preserves the main feature, to force the bride away from her
friends, who then gallop after her to church, arriving _toujours trop
tard_, of course, like the carabineers in 'Les Brigands.'

There have been cases, however, when the bride was caught by a member
of the pursuing party, and borne away--an incident which occurred in
the knowledge of an acquaintance, who related it to me. As may readily
be inferred, the bride in this case was not unwilling to be caught; in
fact she was averse to marrying the man who was taking her to church,
and who was her parent's choice, not her own. The lover who had her
heart caught up with her by dint of good hard riding, and whisked her
on his horse within sight of the church-door, to the intense
astonishment of the bridegroom, who gazed at them open-mouthed as they
galloped away. He thought at first it was a joke, but as the lovers
disappeared in the distance the truth dawned upon him: a Welsh custom
had served something like its original purpose.

But usually, the whole performance is a vehicle for fun of the most
good-natured and innocent sort. It begins by the arrival of the
neighbours on horseback at the residence of the expectant bridegroom.
An eye-witness to a certain wedding gathering in Glamorganshire a few
years ago states that the horsemen exceeded one hundred in number.
From among them a deputation was chosen to go (still on horseback) to
the bride's residence to make formal demand for her. Her door was
barred inside, and the demand was made in rhyme, and replied to in the
same form from within. It often happens that a brisk contest of wits
signalizes this proceeding, for if the voice of any one within is
recognized by one of those outside, his personal peculiarities are
made the subject of satirical verses. A voice inside being recognized
as that of a man who was charged with sheep-stealing, this rhyme was
promptly shouted at him:

    Gwrando, leidr hoyw'r ddafad,
    Ai ti sydd yma heddyw'n geidwad?
    Ai dyna y rheswm cloi y drysau,
    Rhag dwyn y wreigan liw dydd goleu?

    (Ah, sheep-stealer, art thou a guardian of the fair one? If
    the doors were not locked thou wouldst steal the bride in
    broad daylight.)

The doors are opened in the end, of course, and after refreshments the
wedding party gallops off to church. The bride is stolen away and
borne off to a distance on her captor's horse, but only in sport; her
captor brings her back to the church, where she is quietly married to
the proper person. Sometimes the precaution is taken of celebrating
the marriage privately at an early hour, and the racing takes place
afterward.

Obstructions are raised by the bride's friends, to prevent the
bridegroom's party from coming to her house, and these difficulties
must be overcome ere the bride can be approached. Sometimes a mock
battle on the road is a feature of the racing to church. The
obstructions placed in the road in former days included the Gwyntyn, a
sort of game of skill which seems to have been used by most nations in
Europe, called in English the quintain. It was an upright post, upon
which a cross-piece turned freely, at one end of which hung a
sand-bag, the other end presenting a flat side. At this the rider
tilted with his lance, his aim being to pass without being hit in the
rear by the sand-bag. Other obstructions in use are ropes of straw and
the like.

There is a Welsh custom called Chaining, which probably arose out of
the horse-wedding, and still prevails. In the village of Sketty,
Glamorganshire, in August, 1877, I saw a chaining, on the occasion of
a marriage between an old lady of eighty and a man of fifty. The
affair had made so much talk, owing to the age of the bride, that the
whole village was in the streets. While the wedding ceremony was in
progress, a chain was stretched across the street, forming a barrier
which the wedding party could not pass till the chainers were
'tipped.' The driver of the carriage containing the newly wedded pair
was an Englishman, and ignorant of the custom, at which he was
naturally indignant. His angry efforts to drive through the barrier
made great sport for the Welshmen.

The origin of the Welsh horse-wedding may be traced to the Romans, if
no further back, and may thus be connected with the rape of the
Sabines. That the Romans had an exactly similar custom is attested by
Apuleius, and it is said to have been established by Romulus in memory
of the Sabine virgins. It is not improbable that the Romans may have
left the custom behind them when they quitted this territory in the
fifth century, after nearly three hundred years' rule.

FOOTNOTE:

[137] Malkin's 'South Wales,' 67.

