III.

Among the wealthier classes of Wales, certain joyous and genial
wedding customs prevail, such as are common in most parts of the
British isles, but which do not reappear in the new world across the
Atlantic,--a fact by which American life is a heavy loser, in my
opinion. When the Rector of Merthyr's daughter (to use the form of
speech common) was married, a few months since, the tenants of the
estate erected arches of evergreens over the roads, and adorned their
houses with garlands, and for two or three days the estate was a scene
of festivity, ending with the distribution of meat to the poor of the
parish. Such festivities and such decorations are common on the
estates of the country gentry not only, but in the towns as well. At
Tenby, when the High Sheriff's son was married to the Rector of
Tenby's daughter, in 1877, garlands of flowers were hung across the
High Street, bearing pleasant mottoes, while flags and banners
fluttered from house-tops in all directions. Children strewed flowers
in the bride's path as she came out of church, while the bells in the
steeple chimed a merry peal, and a park of miniature artillery boomed
from the pier-head. This custom of children strewing flowers in the
path of the new-made bride is common; so also is that of throwing
showers of rice after the wedded pair, by way of expressing good
wishes--a pleasanter thing to be thrown under these circumstances than
the old shoes of tradition. However, since fashion has taken up the
custom of rice-throwing and shoe-throwing, the shoes have become satin
slippers.

As far back as the 16th century, throwing an old shoe after any one
going on an important errand was deemed lucky in Wales. It is thought
that in the case of a bride, the custom is derived from the old Jewish
law of exchange, when a shoe was given in token that the parents for
ever surrendered all dominion over their daughter. But a precisely
similar custom prevails in China, where it is usual for the bride to
present her husband with a pair of shoes, by way of signifying that
for the future she places herself under his control. 'These are
carefully preserved in the family and are never given away, like other
worn-out articles, it being deemed, that to part with them portends an
early separation between husband and wife.'[138] The custom of
rice-throwing is also Chinese, the rice being viewed as a sign of
abundance. In Sicily, as in some parts of England, wheat is thrown on
the bride's head; in Russia, a handful of hops; in the north of
England a plateful of shortcake;[139] in Yorkshire, bits of the
bride-cake. All these customs, while popularly done 'for luck,' are
apparently symbolical of the obedience and the fruitfulness of the
newly-wedded wife. And as in Scandinavia the bride tries to get her
husband to pick up her handkerchief as an omen of his obeying instead
of compelling obedience, so in China the bride tries to sit on a part
of her husband's dress. The vulgar story and adage, 'Bandbox now,
bandbox always,' expresses the superstition succinctly.

There is a saying current on the Welsh border, that when rosemary
flourishes in the garden of a married pair, the lady 'rules the
roast,' as the phrase is--though if there is anything a woman should
rule, one would think the 'roast' is that thing. 'That be rosemary,
sir,' said an old gardener in Herefordshire, pointing to where the
plant grew; 'they say it grows but where the missus is master, and it
do grow here like wildfire.' The idea of feminine obedience to
masculine will, merely because it is masculine, is in itself looked
upon as a superstition by all cultivated people in these days, I
suppose. Sex aside, if the truth were known, it would be found that
the stronger is the ruler, in all lands, under all customs, be the
outward show of the ruling more or less; and it is not always where
the public sees it most clearly, or fancies it does, that the rule of
the dame is sternest. The strength here employed is not virile
strength; there is nothing necessarily masculine about it. The
severest mistress of her lord I ever knew was a feeble little woman
with hands like a baby's, and a face of wax, with no more will-power
apparently than a week-old kitten, but whose lightest whim lay on her
lord like iron, and was obeyed as faithfully as if it were backed by a
cat-o'-nine-tails and a six-shooter.

To return for a moment to our Welsh wedding customs among the
wealthier classes. When the couple return from their bridal tour, the
fun often begins all over again. Thus at Lampeter, on the edge of
Cardiganshire, last September, when Mr. and Mrs. Jones of Glandennis
(Jones of Glandennis, Roberts of the Dingle, Williams of Pwlldu,--such
cognomens take the place in Wales of the distinctive names which
separate Englishmen one from another, and from Jones of Nevada),--when
Jones of Glandennis brought home his bride, the whole neighbourhood
was agog to greet them. Thousands of people gathered in a field near
the station, and passed their time in athletic sports till the train
arrived, when they woke the echoes with their cheers. The Joneses
entered their carriage, the horses were unharnessed, and a long
procession of tenantry, headed by a brass band, dragged the carriage
all the way to Glandennis, two miles off, some bearing torches by the
side of the carriage. Arches of evergreens were everywhere; and when
they got to the house, nothing would do but Mrs. Jones must appear at
a window and make a little speech of thanks to the crowd; which she
did accordingly--a thing in itself shocking to superstitious ideas of
chivalry, but in strictest accord with the true chivalric spirit
toward woman. Then fireworks blazed up the sky, and bonfires were
lighted on the tops of all the adjoining hills. Lampeter town was
illuminated, and nobody went to bed till the small hours.

After marriage, Welshwomen still in some cases retain their maiden
names, a custom formerly universal among them. The wife of John
Thomas, though the mother of a houseful of children, may be habitually
known among her neighbours as Betty Williams. In other cases, she not
only assumes her husband's name, but the name of his calling as well;
if he is Dick Shon the tailor, she is simply Mrs. Dick Shon the
tailor.
