I.

With the growth of modern refinement the people of every land have
become constantly more decorous in their grief. The effort of the
primitive and untutored mind to utter its sorrow in loud and wild
lamentations, and of friends and neighbours to divert the mind of the
sufferer from his bereavement, gave rise to many funeral customs of
which we still find traces in Wales. Pennant, while travelling in
North Wales, noted, with regard to one Thomas Myddleton, a fact which
he held 'to prove that the custom of the Irish howl, or Scotch
Coranich, was in use among us (the Welsh); for we are told he was
buried "cum magno dolore et clamore cognatorum et propinquorum
omnium."' No such custom now exists; but there is a very impressive
rite, of a corresponding character, but religious, called the Gwylnos.
It is a meeting held in the room where the corpse is lying, on the
night before the funeral. The Irish cry, 'Why did ye die?' is replaced
by pious appeals to Heaven, in which great and strong emotion is
expressed, the deceased referred to in stirring sentences, and his
death made a theme for warnings on the brevity of earth-life and the
importance of the future life of the soul.

On the day of the funeral, however, the customs are not always in
keeping with modern notions of the praiseworthy. Indulgence in
beer-drinking at funerals is still a Welsh practice, and its antiquity
is indicated by a proverb: 'Claddu y marw, ac at y cwrw'--(To bury the
dead, and to the beer.)[141] The collection of Welsh writings called
'Cymru Fu' refers to the custom thus, (to translate:) 'Before the
funeral procession started for the church, the nearest friends and
relatives would congregate around the corpse to wail and weep their
loss; while the rest of the company would be in an adjoining room
drinking warm beer (cwrw brwd) and smoking their pipes; and the women
in still another room drinking tea together.'[142] The writer here
speaks of the custom in the past tense, but apparently rather as a
literary fashion than to indicate a fact; at any rate, the custom is
not extinct. Occasionally it leads to appearances in the police-court
on the part of injudicious mourners.[143] After taking the coffin out
of the house and placing it on a bier near the door, it was formerly
customary for one of the relatives of the deceased to distribute bread
and cheese to the poor, taking care to hand it to each one over the
coffin. These poor people were usually those who had, in expectation
of this gift, been busily engaged in gathering flowers and herbs with
which to grace the coffin. Sometimes this dole was supplemented by the
gift of a loaf of bread or a cheese with a piece of money placed
inside it. After that a cup of drink was presented, and the receiver
was required to drink a little of it immediately.[144] Alluding to
this subject the Rev. E. L. Barnwell[145] says: 'Although this custom
is no longer in fashion, yet it is to some extent represented by the
practice, especially in funerals of a higher class, to hand to those
who are invited to attend the funeral, oblong sponge cakes sealed up
in paper, which each one puts into his or her pocket, but the
providing and distribution of these cakes are now often part of the
undertaker's duty.'

  [Illustration: GIVING FOOD OVER THE COFFIN. (_From an old drawing._)]
