III.

In the Huntsman's Rest Inn at Peterstone-super-Ely, near Cardiff, sat
a group of humble folk one afternoon, when I chanced to stop there to
rest myself by the chimney-side, after a long walk through green
lanes. The men were drinking their tankards of ale and smoking their
long clay pipes; and they were talking about their dogs and horses,
the crops, the hard times, and the prospect of bettering themselves by
emigration to America. On this latter theme I was able to make myself
interesting, and acquaintance was thereupon easily established on a
friendly footing. I led the conversation into the domain of folk-lore;
and this book is richer in illustration on many a page, in
consequence. Among others, this tale was told:

On a certain farm in Glamorganshire lived Rowli Pugh, who was known
far and wide for his evil luck. Nothing prospered that he turned his
hand to; his crops proved poor, though his neighbours' might be good;
his roof leaked in spite of all his mending; his walls remained damp
when every one else's walls were dry; and above all, his wife was so
feeble she could do no work. His fortunes at last seemed so hard that
he resolved to sell out and clear out, no matter at what loss, and try
to better himself in another country--not by going to America, for
there was no America in those days. Well, and if there was, the poor
Welshman didn't know it. So as Rowli was sitting on his wall one day,
hard by his cottage, musing over his sad lot, he was accosted by a
little man who asked him what was the matter. Rowli looked around in
surprise, but before he could answer the ellyll said to him with a
grin, 'There, there, hold your tongue, I know more about you than you
ever dreamed of knowing. You're in trouble, and you're going away. But
you may stay, now I've spoken to you. Only bid your good wife leave
the candle burning when she goes to bed, and say no more about it.'
With this the ellyll kicked up his heels and disappeared. Of course
the farmer did as he was bid, and from that day he prospered. Every
night Catti Jones, his wife,[12] set the candle out, swept the hearth,
and went to bed; and every night the fairies would come and do her
baking and brewing, her washing and mending, sometimes even furnishing
their own tools and materials. The farmer was now always clean of
linen and whole of garb; he had good bread and good beer; he felt like
a new man, and worked like one. Everything prospered with him now as
nothing had before. His crops were good, his barns were tidy, his
cattle were sleek, his pigs the fattest in the parish. So things went
on for three years. One night Catti Jones took it into her head that
she must have a peep at the fair family who did her work for her; and
curiosity conquering prudence, she arose while Rowli Pugh lay snoring,
and peeped through a crack in the door. There they were, a jolly
company of ellyllon, working away like mad, and laughing and dancing
as madly as they worked. Catti was so amused that in spite of herself
she fell to laughing too; and at sound of her voice the ellyllon
scattered like mist before the wind, leaving the room empty. They
never came back any more; but the farmer was now prosperous, and his
bad luck never returned to plague him.

  [Illustration: ROWLI AND THE ELLYLL.]

The resemblance of this tale to many he has encountered will at once
be noted by the student of comparative folk-lore. He will also observe
that it trenches on the domain of another class in my own enumeration,
viz., that of the Bwbach, or household fairy. This is the stone over
which one is constantly stumbling in this field of scientific
research. Mr. Baring-Gould's idea that all household tales are
reducible to a primeval root (in the same or a similar manner that we
trace words to their roots), though most ingeniously illustrated by
him, is constantly involved in trouble of the sort mentioned. He
encounters the obstacle which lies in the path of all who walk this
way. His roots sometimes get inextricably gnarled and intertwisted
with each other. But some effort of this sort is imperative, and we
must do the best we can with our materials. Stories of the class of
Grimm's Witchelmänner (Kinder und Hausmärchen) will be recalled by the
legend of Rowli Pugh as here told. The German Hausmänner are elves of
a domestic turn, sometimes mischievous and sometimes useful, but
usually looking for some material reward for their labours. So with
the English goblin named by Milton in 'L'Allegro,' which drudges,

    To earn his cream-bowl duly set.

FOOTNOTE:

[12] Until recently, Welsh women retained their maiden names even
after marriage.

