THE BLIND SINGER, SAINT HERVÉ


I.

ONCE upon a time when Childebert was King of France, a thousand years
ago, there lived a young man named Hyvarnion who was very handsome and
had the sweetest voice. Hyvarnion was the King's minstrel; he lived at
the palace and it was his business to make music for the King to keep
him in a good temper. For he wrote the most beautiful songs and sang
them to the accompaniment of a golden harp which he carried with him
everywhere he went. And besides all this Hyvarnion was very wise; so
wise that when he was a boy at school he was called the Little Sage, for
Saint Cadoc had been his master and had taught him many things that even
the King, who was a heathen, did not know.

Now Hyvarnion had lived four years with the King when one night he had a
wonderful dream. He dreamed that he saw a beautiful maiden picking
flowers in a meadow, and that she smiled at him and gave him a blossom,
saying, "This is for my King." And Hyvarnion woke up longing to see the
maiden more than anything else in the world.

For three nights he dreamed the same dream, of the singing maiden and
the meadow and the flowers; and each time she seemed more beautiful than
on the last. So on the fourth day he woke up and said, "I must find that
maiden. I _must_ find her and hear her call me her King."

So, taking his golden harp on his back, he went out from the palace and
struck into the deep black forest. By and by he came to an open place,
like a meadow, where the grass grew tall and thick, and where in the
midst was a spring like a bit of mirror set in a green frame. And
Hyvarnion's heart beat fast with joy when he saw on the border of the
spring the very maiden about whom he had dreamed, but much more
beautiful than any dream. She was bending over, picking something from
the grass, and she seemed like a wonderful pink-and-white flower set
among the other flowers of yellow and red and blue.

For a moment Hyvarnion stood and gazed with open mouth and happy eyes.
Then he took his harp and began to sing a song which he had just that
minute made. For because he was a minstrel it was easier for him to sing
than to talk. And in the song he called her Queen Iris gathering flowers
for her crown. Then the maiden raised her head and she turned pinker and
whiter, and looked even more like a fair flower than before. For she too
had had a dream, three times. And it was of golden-haired Hyvarnion that
she had dreamed, whom she now saw looking at her and singing so sweetly
with his silver voice.

But she also answered him in a song, for she was a singer, too. "I am no
Queen Iris," she sang, "I am only the little maiden Rivanone, though
they call me Queen of this Fountain. And I am not gathering flowers as
you say, fair Sir, but I am seeking simple herbs such as wise men use to
cure pain and trouble."

[Illustration: HYVARNION AND RIVANONE]

"What are the herbs you seek, Rivanone?" asked Hyvarnion, coming nearer.
She held up a sprig of green in her white hand. "See, this is the
vervain," she answered in song; "this brings happiness and heart's ease.
But I seek two others which I have not found. The second opens the eyes
of the blind. And the third,--few may ever find that precious herb,--the
third is the root of life, and at its touch death flees away. Alas!
Fair Sir, I cannot find those two, though some day I feel that I shall
need them both most sorely." Rivanone sighed and two tears stood like
dewdrops in her flower eyes.

But Hyvarnion had now come very close. "Still, you have found the first,
which gives happiness, little Queen," he sang tenderly. "Have you not
happiness to share with me, Rivanone?" Then the maiden looked up in his
eyes and smiled, and held out to him a sprig of the green vervain.

"For my King," she sang, just as he had dreamed. And then he did just
what she had dreamed he would do; but that is a secret which I cannot
tell. For no one knows all that a maiden dreams.

And after this and that they came back to the King's palace hand in
hand, singing a beautiful song which together they had made about
Happiness. So they were married at the court, and the King did them
great honor and made them King and Queen of music and of song.

So, happily they lived and happily they sang in their little Kingdom of
Poesie,--for did they not possess the herb of joy which Rivanone had
found and shared with Hyvarnion, her King?


II.

BUT it was a pity that Rivanone had not also found those other plants
for which she had been seeking, the root which brings light to the
blind, and the root which gives life to the dying. Because Rivanone had
foreseen only too well the need of them which would come to her. For
when, after a year or two, their little son was born, his blue eyes were
sightless and all the colored wonders of the world were secrets which he
could never know. So they named him Hervé, which means Bitterness,--the
first bitterness which had come into their lives of joy. But it was not
the last. Not long after the little Hervé came, golden-haired Hyvarnion
lay ill and dying. And because on that spring morning, Rivanone had not
found the herb of life, she could not keep him from going away to find
it for himself in that fair country where it is the only plant that
grows, with wonderful blossoms which no living man has ever seen.

So Hyvarnion passed away from his kingdom of music and song, which he
left to be shared by dear Rivanone and Hervé his little son. Thus Hervé
became a Prince, heir to all the gifts of that royal pair. And of these
there were in particular four of the best: a beautiful face, the
sweetest voice that ever thrilled in Brittany, the golden harp of
Hyvarnion his father, and many a lovely song made by those two, which
Rivanone taught him. What a wonderful Kingdom that was to be his! What
beautiful gifts for a little boy to own!

But even in a kingdom of this sort one has to bear sorrows and
discomforts, just as folk do in other kingdoms which are less fair.
Hervé's name meant bitterness, and there was much bitterness in his
little life before he learned what a Prince he really was. For he was
blind and could not play with the other children. Rivanone was a poor
widow and there was no one to earn bread for the two. Sometimes the
carols which they sang together were the only breakfast to begin the
day. Sometimes the songs Rivanone made beside his bed at night were the
only food Hervé had tasted since sunrise. Sometimes they were both so
hungry that they could not sing at all; and those were sad times indeed.

But when Hervé was seven years old a great idea came to him. Rivanone
lay ill and miserable, and there was nothing to eat in the house. Hervé
sat by her side holding her hand, and wishing there was something he
could do about it. Blind as he was he had never been out of the house
alone. But suddenly courage came to him and hope, through his great
idea.

"I will save you, dear mother!" he cried, throwing his arms about her
neck. "I will take father's golden harp and go out upon the highway and
sing your beautiful songs. People will give me pennies, and I shall buy
you food."

So, carrying the golden harp on his back, in his ragged clothes and bare
feet the little fellow went out stumbling and feeling his way along the
hard road. Now almost at the first corner he met a white dog, who seemed
to have no master. This creature came sniffing and whining up to Hervé
and licked his hand. And when the boy went on the dog followed close at
his side as if to guide and protect him. Hervé asked every one he met
whose dog it was; but they all said it was a strange dog come from
No-where, and belonged to No-one. It seemed almost as if the beast had
been sent especially for Hervé. So at last he said, "You shall be my
dog," and at that the great white beast jumped up and barked for joy.
Hervé fastened a rope about the dog's neck and kept one end in his hand.
So now he had some one to guide and guard him, for the dog was very
careful and kind and took care that Hervé never stumbled nor went astray
into the ditch by the side of the road.

It must have been a hard-hearted man indeed who had no pennies to spare
for the blind boy led by the big white dog. With his bare feet blue with
cold, his teeth chattering, and his eyes turned wistfully up to the sky
which he could not see, he was a sad little figure to meet on the lonely
Brittany roads. And he sang so sweetly, too! No one had ever heard such
a voice as that, nor such beautiful songs. Every one who heard gave him
money. So he was helping his mother, getting her food and medicine and
clothes to keep her warm. And this thought comforted him when he was
shivering with cold, his rags blown about by the wind and soaked in the
rain.

Day after day, week after week, Hervé trudged along the flinty roads.
Often he limped with cold, bleeding feet which the faithful dog would
try to lick warm again. Often he was very tired, and sometimes he was
sad, when people were not kind. But this seldom happened. Once Hervé was
passing through a strange village where all the folk were heathen. And a
band of naughty children began to dance about him and tease him, pulling
his hair and twitching his cloak. And they mocked his music, singing,
"Blind boy, blind boy! Where are you going, blind boy!" Then it is said
that a wonderful thing happened. Hervé was sorry because they were so
cruel and unkind, and he struck a strange chord of music on his harp and
sang in a low, clear voice,--

"Dance on, bright eyes who can see. Dance on, children who mock a poor
blind boy. Dance on,--and never stop so long as the world wags." And it
is said that the wicked children are still dancing, over the world and
back, around and around, tired though they must be. And they will be
still more tired before all is done. For they must whirl and pirouette
until the end of the world; and that is a long time even for children
who love to dance.

At a different time another unkind thing happened to Saint Hervé. But
this time it was a beast who hurt his feelings. And this was strange;
for usually the beasts loved him and tried to help him as the white dog
had done. But after all this was only a mistake; yet it was a sad
mistake, for it cost Hervé the life of his faithful guide. This is how
it happened.

As Hervé and his dog were passing along a lonely road, a black wolf
sprang out upon them. He mistook the dog for an ancient enemy of his,
another wolf. For indeed Blanco looked like a white wolf,--a wolf such
as Saint Bridget gave the King of Ireland. And without stopping to find
out who he really was, which would have saved all the trouble, they had
a terrible fight, and poor Blanco was killed by the huge black wolf.

Then Hervé was sad indeed. He cried and sobbed and was so wretched that
the wolf was sorry. Besides, as soon as the fight was over the wolf had
found out his mistake, and saw that it was a strange dog whom he had
killed, no wolf-enemy at all. He was very much ashamed. He came up to
Hervé and fawned at his feet, trying to tell that he was sorry, and
asking what he should do about it. So Hervé told him that if he would be
his dog now instead of Blanco he would try to forgive the wolf; though
he was, oh, so sorry to lose his faithful dog.

After that Hervé went on his wanderings led by a big black wolf whom he
held in a strong leather leash. And the wolf became as dear to him as
Blanco had been. He slept in the barn with the oxen when he was at home,
and never snapped nor bit at them as most wolves would do. But he kept
sharp watch over his little master, and saw that no one hurt or cheated
him. I should be sorry to think what would have happened to any one who
had dared to touch Hervé while the wolf was near. And he was always
near, with his sharp teeth and watchful eyes.

So they wandered and wandered together, Hervé and the wolf, carrying
music from town to town, the songs of Hyvarnion and Rivanone. But Hervé
had not yet learned to make songs of his own.


III.

NOW after seven years of wandering, Hervé had earned money enough to
keep his mother in comfort. He longed to go to school and be taught
things, to grow wise like his father, who had been called the Little
Sage, and to learn how to make songs for himself. For he felt that it
was time for him to come into the kingdom of Hyvarnion and Rivanone; and
the songs shut in his heart were bursting to come out.

Gourvoyed, the brother of Rivanone, was a holy hermit who lived alone in
the forest, and he would teach Hervé, his nephew, for love of him. For
Gourvoyed was a wise man, skilled in all things, but especially in the
making of songs.

It was a blessed morning when Hervé started for his school in the woods;
he was going to his kingdom! The sunlight framed his fair curls in a
halo of light, as if giving him a blessing. Birds sang all along the way
as if telling him that with Gourvoyed he would learn to make music even
sweeter than theirs. The wolf led him eagerly, bounding with joy; for he
shared in all the hopes of Hervé's life. And all the creatures knew that
he would become a great poet. And so indeed it was.

For Hervé soon learned all that Gourvoyed could teach, and in his turn
he became a master. Many pupils came to the hut in the forest which the
hermit gave up to him, and begged Hervé to make them singer-poets like
himself. But he could not do that. He could teach them to sing and to
play the harp; but no one could sing as well as he sang, or play as well
as he played. And no one can ever be taught to make poetry unless he has
it in his soul, as Hervé had. For that is a royal gift, and it came to
Hervé from Hyvarnion and Rivanone, the King and Queen of music and of
song. It was Hervé's kingdom, and it was given him to take away the
bitterness from his name, to make it remembered as sweet, sweet, sweet.

And now on his wanderings from town to town Hervé was received like a
prince. He sat at great lords' tables, and sang in ladies' bowers. He
had golden goblets as his gifts, and shining gems to wear if he chose.
But he was so generous that he gave them all away. Never was there heard
music so sweet as his; never were there songs so beautiful as he sang to
the rippling of his father's golden harp. For Hervé was even a greater
minstrel than Hyvarnion or Rivanone had been.

In his wanderings all about the country Hervé came to many strange
places and met with many strange adventures. Once he spent the night at
the castle of a great lord who made Hervé sit on his right hand at table
and honored him above all his guests. When the banquet was over, at the
Count's request a page brought to Hervé his golden harp, and they all
shouted for "A song! a song!" Every one pushed back his stool to
listen, and Hervé took the harp and ran his finger over the golden
strings with a sound like drops of rain upon the flowers.

Now outside the castle, beyond the moat, was a pond. And in the pond
lived a whole colony of great green bullfrogs, whose voices were gruffer
and grummer than the lowest twanging note on Hervé's harp. And as soon
as Hervé began to sing these rude frogs began to bellow and growl as if
trying to drown his music. Perhaps they were jealous; for Hervé's voice
was sweeter than a silver bell. But all they could sing was "Ker-_chog_!
Ker-r-kity-chog, Ker-_chog_!" which is neither very musical nor very
original, being the same tune which all the frog-people have sung from
the earliest days.

Now Hervé was displeased by their disagreeable noise. He could not sing
nor play, nor think of the words which belonged with his music: only the
"Ker-_chog_! Ker-r-kity-chog! Ker-_chog_!" sounded in his ears. And it
grew louder and louder every moment as one by one all the frogs joined
in the chorus.

Hervé waited for them to stop. But when he found that they did not mean
to do this, but were really trying to drown his voice, he was very
angry. He strode to the window holding his harp in his hand. And leaning
far out he struck another of his wonderful chords of music, such as had
charmed the mocking children once before, as you remember.

"Sing your last song, O Frogs," he said. "Sing your last Ker-_chog_, for
henceforth you will be silent. I command you from this night never to
open your mouths again. All save one, the littlest of you all. And he
shall sing forever, without cease, to remind you of your rudeness to
me." And no sooner had he ceased speaking when there came a great
silence outside the window, broken only by one wee piping tadpole voice.
"Ker-_chog_! Ker-r-kity-chog! Ker-_chog_!" he chanted his sad little
solo. And all alone he had to sing and sing this same tune forever. I
dare say one can hear him yet in the greeny pond outside that old French
castle.


IV.

NOW after many years of wandering, of singing, of making beautiful
songs, of teaching and wandering again, Hervé's dear mother Rivanone
died. But he still had some one to love and look for him and the wolf
when he came home from his travels. For Rivanone had adopted a dear
little girl named Christine, beautiful as sunshine and sweet as a
flower. She called Hervé "Uncle" and loved him dearly, and the wolf was
a great friend of hers.

So at last he thought to settle down and make music about him in his own
home, letting people come there to hear it, instead of carrying it to
them by road and river. For he was growing an old man, and it was not so
easy to travel in his blindness as it used to be. Besides, the black
wolf was also growing gray, and needed rest after these long years of
faithful work.

Hervé resolved to build a church, and to live there with Christine near
him in a little house of her own. He had grown to be an important
personage in the world, and had many friends, pupils, and followers who
wanted to live near him. So forth they set to find a place for their
church, Hervé and his troop of black-robed monks. And before them, like
a little white dove among the ravens, ran Christine holding her uncle's
hand in one of hers, and in the other grasping the leash at which tugged
the grizzled old wolf, who was guiding them. Over many a hill and dale
and bloomy meadow he had led Hervé before now, down many a lane and
village street, but never upon so important a journey as this. For this
was to be the old wolf's last long tramp with his master. And the wolf
was to choose the spot where the church should stand. Where he stopped
to rest, there would they lay the first stone.

So he led them on and on. And at last he lay down in a green spot by a
river, just the place for a beautiful church to grow up. And thenceforth
Hervé the minstrel would wander no more, but bide and rest and be happy
with the wolf and Christine.

They built her an arbor near the church, in a clump of willows on the
border of a spring. It was cone-shaped and covered with straw like a
huge beehive. And Christine herself seemed like a busy bee gathering
honey as she buzzed in and out among the roses, humming little tunes
below her breath. For she was always among the flowers, as Rivanone had
been. Every Saturday morning she would rise early, and with her little
basket on her arm would go out to pick the blossoms with the dew still
on them. And every Saturday evening she came to the church with her arms
full of flowers till she looked like a bouquet of sweetness. And going
into the empty church she would busy herself with arranging the flowers
for the next morning's service. For it was her duty to see that Uncle
Hervé's church was kept clean and sweet and beautiful.

And while Christine stood there putting the flowers into tall golden
vases, singing softly the songs which Rivanone had taught her, her Uncle
Hervé would come creeping up the steps of the church, his hand on the
head of the wolf, who always led him to the place where he heard her
voice. Softly, very softly, as if he were doing something naughty,
Hervé would pull open the heavy door, just a crack, the better to hear
her sing. Then he would put his ear to the opening; while the wolf would
thrust his nose in below, and wag his tail eagerly. But Christine's keen
ears always heard them, no matter how slyly the good blind man crept up
to that door. And it became part of the game that she should cry out
suddenly,--

"I see you, Uncle! I see you!" And though he could not see her at all,
he would start and pop back, pulling the wolf with him as though he had
done something wrong. Then without making any noise they would tiptoe
away to Hervé's house, their hearts beating with love for the dear
little maiden who would soon come to bid them good-night on her way home
to her bower.

So they lived happily all the rest of their days, these three among the
flowers. And in spite of his name Hervé's life was not one of
bitterness, but of joy. The kingdom which had come to him from Hyvarnion
and Rivanone was his all his life long; and though he no longer wandered
painfully from town to town, the songs which he made wandered still
from heart to heart. And long, long afterwards their echo made music
through the land of Brittany, as the fragrance of a flower lasts long
after the flower has passed on its way elsewhere.

Dear Saint Hervé!



