SAINT FRANCIS OF ASSISI


BAREFOOTED in the snow, bareheaded in the rain, Saint Francis wandered
up and down the world smiling for the great love that was in his heart.

And because it grew from love the smile of Saint Francis was a wonderful
thing. It opened the hearts of men and coaxed the secrets of their
thoughts. It led human folk whithersoever Saint Francis willed. It drew
the beasts to his side and the birds to nestle in his bosom. It was like
a magic charm.

Great princes knew his smile and they obeyed its command to be generous
and good. The sick and sorrowful knew his smile. It meant healing and
comfort. Then they rose and blessed God in the name of Saint Francis.
The wretched beggars in the streets of Assisi knew it. To them the smile
of "the Lord's own beggar" meant help and sympathy. Like them he was
poor and homeless, often ill and hungry. They wondered that he could
smile. But he said, "It does not become a servant of God to have an air
of melancholy and a face full of trouble." So they also tried to smile,
poor fellows. But how different it was!

The little lambs to whom he gave his special protection and care knew
the smile of Saint Francis. Once he met two woolly lambkins who were
being carried to market. He never had any money, but taking off his
cloak, which was all he had to part with, he gave it to buy their lives.
And he carried the lambs home in his bosom.

The wilder beasts beyond the mountains, the fierce wolves and shy foxes
of Syria and Spain whom he met in his wanderings knew Saint Francis.
Here was a brother who was not afraid of them and whom they could trust
in return, a brother who understood and sympathized. The birds in the
trees knew also, and his coming was the signal of peace. Then they sang
with Francis, but he was the sweetest singer of them all.

Besides these living things the green fields of Italy, the trees, the
meadows, the brooks, the flowers all knew the smile of Saint Francis. It
meant to them many things which only a poet can tell. But Francis
understood, for he was a poet.

Upon all alike his face of love beamed tenderly. For Saint Francis of
Assisi was a little brother of the whole great world and of all created
things. Not only did his heart warm to Brother Sheep and Sister Bees, to
his Brother Fish and his little Sisters the Doves, but he called the Sun
and Wind his brothers and the Moon and Water his sisters. Of all the
saints about whom the legends tell, Francis was the gentlest and most
loving. And if

          "He prayeth best who loveth best
             All things both great and small,"

the prayers of Saint Francis must have been very dear to Him who "made
and loveth all."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was none so poor as Francis. Not a penny did he have, not a penny
would he touch. Let them be given to those who could not smile, he said.
His food he begged from door to door, broken crusts for a single poor
meal; more he would not take. His sleeping place was the floor or the
haymow, the ruined church, whatever lodging chance gave him. Oftenest
he slept upon the bare ground with a stone for his pillow. He wanted to
be poor because Christ was poor, and he was trying to live like his
Master.

In his coarse brown gown, tied about the waist with a rope, without hat
or shoes he wandered singing, smiling. The love which beamed from him
like radiance from a star shone back from every pair of eyes which
looked into his own. For all the world loved Francis in the time of the
Crusades. And even to-day, seven hundred years since that dear beggar
passed cheerily up and down the rough Italian roads,--even to-day there
are many who love him like a lost elder brother.

Saint Francis preached to all lessons of charity and peace. His were
simple words, for he had not the wisdom of many books. But he knew the
book of the human heart from cover to cover. His words were like fire,
they warmed and wakened. No one could resist the entreaty and the love
that was in them. So thousands joined the Society of Little Brothers of
which he was the founder, and became his helpers in works of charity and
holiness.

His church was out of doors in the beautiful world that he loved, in
mountain, field, or forest, wherever he happened to be wandering.
Sometimes he preached by the candle-light of stars. Often the
cloistering trees along the roadside made his chapel, and the blue sky
was the only roof between him and heaven. Often his choir was of the
brother birds in the branches and his congregation a group of brother
beasts. For he preached to them also who, though they spoke a different
language, were yet children of his Father. And in his little talks to
them he always showed the courtesy which one brother owes another.

Once, on returning from a journey beyond the sea, he was traveling
through the Venetian country, when he heard a great congregation of
birds singing among the bushes. And he said to his companion, "Our
sisters, the birds, are praising their Maker. Let us then go into their
midst and sing." So they did this, and the birds did not fly away but
continued to sing so loudly that the brothers could not hear each other.
Then Saint Francis turned to the birds and said politely, "Sisters,
cease your song until we have rendered our bounden praise to God." So
the birds were still until the brothers had finished their psalm. But
after that when it was again their turn the birds went on with their
song.

       *       *       *       *       *