
Saint Francis preached the lessons of peace; he would not have cruelty
or bloodshed among his human friends. And he also taught his beasts to
be kind. He loved best the gentle lambs, one of which was almost always
with him, and in his sermons he would point to them to show men what
their lives should be. But there is a story told of the lesson he taught
a wolf that shows what power the Saint had over the fiercer animals.
There are many stories of wolves whom the saints made tame. But this
wolf of Saint Francis was the most terrible of them all.

This huge and savage wolf had been causing great horror to the people
of Gubbio. For in the night he not only stole sheep and cows from the
farms, but he came and carried off men also for his dinner. So that
people were afraid to go out of the town for fear of being gobbled up.

Now Saint Francis came. And he said, "I will go out and seek this wolf."
But the townsfolk begged him not to go, for the good man was dear to
them and they feared never to see him again. However, he was resolved
and went forth from the gate.

He had gone but a little way when out rushed the wolf to meet him, with
his mouth wide open, roaring horribly. Then Saint Francis made the sign
of the cross and said gently:--

"Come hither, Brother Wolf. I command thee in Christ's behalf that thou
do no evil to me nor to any one." And wonderful to say! The wolf grew
tame and came like a lamb to lie at Saint Francis' feet.

Then Francis went on to rebuke him, saying that he deserved to be hung
for his many sins, being a robber and a wicked murderer of men and
beasts.

"But I wish, Brother Wolf," he said, "to make peace between thee and
men; therefore vex them no more and they will pardon thee all thy past
offenses, and neither dogs nor men will chase thee any more."

At this the wolf wagged his tail and bowed his head to show he
understood. And putting his right paw in the hand of Saint Francis he
promised never again to steal nor slay. Then like a gentle dog he
followed the holy man to the market-place of the town, where great
crowds of people had gathered to see what Saint Francis would do with
the great beast, their enemy, for they thought he was to be punished.
But Francis rose and said to them:--

"Hearken, dear brethren: Brother Wolf who is here before you has
promised me that he will make peace with you and will never injure you
in any way, if ye promise to give him day by day what is needful for his
dinner. And I will be surety for him." Thereupon with a great shout all
the people promised to give him his daily food. Again the wolf wagged
his tail, flapped his long ears, bowed his head, and gave his paw to
Saint Francis to show that he would keep his word. All the people saw
him do this. And then there were shouts of wonder you may be sure, and
great rejoicing because Saint Francis had saved them from this cruel
beast, and had made a gentle friend of their dreaded enemy.

So after this the wolf lived two years at Gubbio and went about from
door to door humbly begging his food like Saint Francis himself. He
never harmed any one, not even the little children who teased and pulled
him about. But all the people loved him and gave him what he liked to
eat; and not even a dog would bark at his heels or growl at the friend
of Saint Francis. So he lived to a good old age. And when after two
years Brother Wolf died because he was so old, the citizens were very
sorrowful. For not only did they miss the soft pat-pat of his steps
passing through the city, but they grieved for the sorrow of Saint
Francis in losing a kindly friend,--Saint Francis of whose saintliness
and power the humble beast had been a daily reminder.

       *       *       *       *       *