SAINT LAUNOMAR'S COW


SAINT LAUNOMAR had once been a shepherd boy in the meadows of sunny
France, and had lived among the gentle creatures of the fold and byre.
So he understood them and their ways very well, and they knew him for
their friend. For this is a secret which one cannot keep from the
animals whose speech is silent.

Saint Launomar had a cow of whom he was fond, a sleek black and white
beauty, who pastured in the green meadows of Chartres near the monastery
and came home every evening to be milked and to rub her soft nose
against her master's hand, telling him how much she loved him. Mignon
was a very wise cow; you could tell that by the curve of her horns and
by the wrinkles in her forehead between the eyes; and especially by the
way she switched her tail. And indeed, a cow ought to be wise who has
been brought up by a whole monastery of learned men, with Launomar, the
wisest person in all the country, for her master and friend.

It was a dark night after milking time; Launomar had put Mignon in her
stall with a supper of hay before her, and had bade her good-night and a
pleasant cud-time. Then he had shut the heavy barn door and had gone
back to his cell to sleep soundly till morning.

But no sooner had his lantern disappeared through the gate of the
monastery, than out of the forest came five black figures, creeping,
creeping along the wall and across the yard and up to the great oak
door. They were all muffled in long black cloaks, and wore their caps
pulled down over their faces, as if they were afraid of being
recognized. They were wicked-looking men, and they had big knives stuck
in their belts quite convenient to their hands. It was a band of
robbers; and they had come to steal Launomar's cow, who was known to be
the handsomest in all that part of the world.

Very softly they forced open the great door, and very softly they stole
across the floor to Mignon's stall and threw a strong halter about her
neck to lead her away. But first they were careful to tie up her mouth
in a piece of cloth so that she could not low and tell the whole
monastery what danger she was in. Mignon was angry, for that was just
what she had meant to do as soon as she saw that these were no friends,
but wicked men who had come for no good to her or to the monastery.

But now she had to go with them dumbly, although she struggled and
kicked and made all the noise she could. But the monks were already
sound asleep and snoring on their hard pallets, and never suspected what
was going on so near to them. Even Launomar, who turned over in his
sleep and murmured, "Ho, Mignon, stand still!" when he dimly recognized
a sound of kicking,--even Launomar did not waken to rescue his dear
Mignon from the hands of those villains who were taking her away.

The robbers led her hurriedly down the lane, across the familiar meadows
and into the dense woods, where they could hide from any one who
happened to pass by. Now it was dark and they could see but dimly where
they were going. The paths crossed and crisscrossed in so many
directions that they soon began to quarrel about which was the right
one to take. They did not know this part of the country very well, for
they were strangers from a different province, who had come to
Launomar's home because they had heard of his famous cow and were bound
to have her for themselves.

Very soon the robbers were lost in the tangle of trees and bushes and
did not know where they were, or in which direction they ought to go.
One said, "Go that way," pointing towards the north. And one said, "No,
no! Go _that_ way," pointing directly south. The third grumbled and
said, "Ho, fellows! Not so, but _this_ way," and he strode towards the
east. While the fourth man cried, "You are all wrong, comrades. It is
_there_ we must go," and he started to lead Mignon towards the west. But
the fifth robber confessed that indeed he did not know.

"Let us follow the cow," he cried; "she is the only one who can see in
the dark. I have always heard that animals will lead you aright if you
leave the matter to them." Now as the other robbers really did not have
the least idea in the world as to which was the right direction, this
seemed to them as sensible a plan as any. So they stripped the halter
from Mignon's head and said, "Hi, there! Get along, Cow, and show us the
way."

Mignon looked at them through the dark with her big brown eyes, and
laughed inside. It seemed too good to be true! They had left her free,
and were bidding her to guide them on their way out of the forest back
to their own country. Mignon chuckled again, so loudly that they thought
she must be choking, and hastily untied the cloth from her mouth. This
was just what she wanted, for she longed to chew her cud again. She
tossed her head and gave a gentle "Moo!" as if to say, "Come on, simple
men, and I will show you the way." But really she was thinking to
herself, "Aha! my fine fellows. Now I will lead you a pretty chase. And
you shall be repaid for this night's work, aha!"

Mignon was a very wise cow. She had not pastured in the meadows about
Chartres with blind eyes. She knew the paths north and south and east
and west through the forest and the fern; and even in the dark of the
tangled underbrush she could feel out the way quite plainly. But she
said to herself, "I must not make the way too easy for these wicked men.
I must punish them all I can now that it is my turn."

So she led them roundabout and roundabout, through mud and brambles and
swamps; over little brooks and through big miry ponds where they were
nearly drowned,--roundabout and roundabout all night long. They wanted
to rest, but she went so fast that they could not catch her to make her
stand still. And they dared not lose sight of her big whiteness through
the dark, for now they were completely lost and could never find their
way out of the wilderness without her. So all night long she kept them
panting and puffing and wading after her, till they were all worn out,
cold and shivering with wet, scratched and bleeding from the briars, and
cross as ten sticks.

But when at last, an hour after sunrise, Mignon led them out into an
open clearing, their faces brightened.

"Oh, I think I remember this place," said the first man.

"Yes, it has a familiar look. We must be near home," said the second.

"We are at least twenty-five miles from the monks of Chartres by this
time," said the third, "and I wish we had some breakfast."

"By another hour we shall have the cow safe in our home den," said the
fourth, "and then we will have some bread and milk."

But the fifth interrupted them saying, "Look! Who is that man in gray?"

They all looked up quickly and began to tremble; but Mignon gave a great
"Moo!" and galloped forward to meet the figure who had stepped out from
behind a bush. It was Saint Launomar himself!

He had been up ever since dawn looking for his precious cow; for when he
went to milk her he had found the barn empty, and her footprints with
those of the five robbers in the moist earth had told the story and
pointed which way the company had gone. But it was not his plan to scold
or frighten the robbers. He walked up to them, for they were so
surprised to see him that they stood still trembling, forgetting even to
run away.

"Good-morning, friends," said Launomar kindly. "You have brought back
my cow, I see, who to-night for the first time has left her stall to
wander far. I thank you, good friends, for bringing Mignon to me. For
she is not only a treasure in herself, but she is my dearest friend and
I should be most unhappy to lose her."

The men stood staring at Launomar in astonishment. They could hardly
believe their eyes and their ears. Where did he come from? What did he
mean? But when they realized how kind his voice was, and that he was not
accusing them nor threatening to have them punished, they were very much
ashamed. They hung their heads guiltily; and then all of a sudden they
fell at his feet, the five of them, confessing how it had all come about
and begging his pardon.

"We stole the cow, Master," said the first one.

"And carried her these many miles away," said the second.

"We are wicked robbers and deserve to be punished," said the third.

"But we beg you to pardon us," cried the fourth.

"Let us depart, kind Father, we pray you," begged the fifth. "And be so
good as to direct us on our way, for we are sorely puzzled."

"Nay, nay," answered Saint Launomar pleasantly, "the cow hath led you a
long way, hath she not? You must be both tired and hungry. You cannot
journey yet." And in truth they were miserable objects to see, so that
the Saint's kind heart was filled with pity, robbers though they were.
"Follow me," he said. By this time they were too weak and weary to think
of disobeying. So meekly they formed into a procession of seven,
Launomar and the cow going cheerfully at the head. For these two were
very glad to be together again, and his arm was thrown lovingly about
her glossy neck as they went.

But what was the amazement of the five robbers when in a short minute or
two they turned a corner, and there close beside them stood the
monastery itself, with the very barn from which they had stolen Mignon
the night before! All this time the clever cow had led them in great
circles roundabout and roundabout her own home. And after all this
scrambling and wading through the darkness, in the morning they were no
farther on their journey than they had been at the start. What a wise
cow that was! And what a good breakfast of bran porridge and hay and
sweet turnips Launomar gave her to pay for her hard night's work.

The five robbers had a good breakfast too; but perhaps they did not
relish it as Mignon did hers. For their consciences were heavy; besides,
they sat at the monastery table, and all the monks stood by in a row,
saying nothing but pursing up their mouths and looking pious; which was
trying. And when the robbers came to drink their porridge Launomar said
mildly,--

"That is Mignon's milk which you drink, Sirs. It is the best milk in
France, and you are welcome to it for your breakfast to-day, since we
have such reason to be grateful to you for not putting it beyond our
reach forever. Ah, my friends, we could ill spare so worthy a cow, so
good a friend, so faithful a guide. But I trust that you will not need
her services again. Perhaps by daylight you can find your way home
without her if I direct you. The highroad is plain and straight for
honest men. I commend it to you."

So, when they were refreshed and rested, Launomar led them forth and
pointed out the way as he had promised. He and Mignon stood on the crest
of a little hill and watched them out of sight. Then they turned and
looked at one another, the wise Saint and his wise cow.

And they both chuckled inside.




SAINT WERBURGH & HER GOOSE


I.

SAINT WERBURGH was a King's daughter, a real princess, and very
beautiful. But unlike most princesses of the fairy tales, she cared
nothing at all about princes or pretty clothes or jewels, or about
having a good time. Her only longing was to do good and to make other
people happy, and to grow good and wise herself, so that she could do
this all the better. So she studied and studied, worked and worked; and
she became a holy woman, an Abbess. And while she was still very young
and beautiful, she was given charge of a whole convent of nuns and
school-girls not much younger than herself, because she was so much
wiser and better than any one else in all the countryside.

But though Saint Werburgh had grown so famous and so powerful, she still
remained a simple, sweet girl. All the country people loved her, for she
was always eager to help them, to cure the little sick children and to
advise their fathers and mothers. She never failed to answer the
questions which puzzled them, and so she set their poor troubled minds
at ease. She was so wise that she knew how to make people do what she
knew to be right, even when they wanted to do wrong. And not only human
folk but animals felt the power of this young Saint. For she loved and
was kind to them also. She studied about them and grew to know their
queer habits and their animal way of thinking. And she learned their
language, too. Now when one loves a little creature very much and
understands it well, one can almost always make it do what one
wishes--that is, if one wishes right.

For some time Saint Werburgh had been interested in a flock of wild
geese which came every day to get their breakfast in the convent meadow,
and to have a morning bath in the pond beneath the window of her cell.
She grew to watch until the big, long-necked gray things with their
short tails and clumsy feet settled with a harsh "Honk!" in the grass.
Then she loved to see the big ones waddle clumsily about in search of
dainties for the children, while the babies stood still, flapping their
wings and crying greedily till they were fed.

There was one goose which was her favorite. He was the biggest of them
all, fat and happy looking. He was the leader and formed the point of
the V in which a flock of wild geese always flies. He was the first to
alight in the meadow, and it was he who chose the spot for their
breakfast. Saint Werburgh named him Grayking, and she grew very fond of
him, although they had never spoken to one another.

Master Hugh was the convent Steward, a big, surly fellow who did not
love birds nor animals except when they were served up for him to eat.
Hugh also had seen the geese in the meadow. But, instead of thinking how
nice and funny they were, and how amusing it was to watch them eat the
worms and flop about in the water, he thought only, "What a fine goose
pie they would make!" And especially he looked at Grayking, the plumpest
and most tempting of them all, and smacked his lips. "Oh, how I wish I
had you in my frying-pan!" he said to himself.

Now it happened that worms were rather scarce in the convent meadow that
spring. It had been dry, and the worms had crawled away to moister
places. So Grayking and his followers found it hard to get breakfast
enough. One morning, Saint Werburgh looked in vain for them in the usual
spot. At first she was only surprised; but as she waited and waited, and
still they did not come, she began to feel much alarmed.

Just as she was going down to her own dinner, the Steward, Hugh,
appeared before her cap in hand and bowing low. His fat face was puffed
and red with hurrying up the convent hill, and he looked angry.

"What is it, Master Hugh?" asked Saint Werburgh in her gentle voice.
"Have you not money enough to buy to-morrow's breakfast?" for it was his
duty to pay the convent bills.

"Nay, Lady Abbess," he answered gruffly; "it is not lack of money that
troubles me. It is abundance of geese."

"Geese! How? Why?" exclaimed Saint Werburgh, startled. "What of geese,
Master Hugh?"

"This of geese, Lady Abbess," he replied. "A flock of long-necked
thieves have been in my new-planted field of corn, and have stolen all
that was to make my harvest." Saint Werburgh bit her lips.

"What geese were they?" she faltered, though she guessed the truth.

"Whence the rascals come, I know not," he answered, "but this I know.
They are the same which gather every morning in the meadow yonder. I
spied the leader, a fat, fine thief with a black ring about his neck. It
should be a noose, indeed, for hanging. I would have them punished, Lady
Abbess."

"They shall be punished, Master Hugh," said Saint Werburgh firmly, and
she went sadly up the stair to her cell without tasting so much as a bit
of bread for her dinner. For she was sorry to find her friends such
naughty birds, and she did not want to punish them, especially Grayking.
But she knew that she must do her duty.

When she had put on her cloak and hood she went out into the courtyard
behind the convent where there were pens for keeping doves and chickens
and little pigs. And standing beside the largest of these pens Saint
Werburgh made a strange cry, like the voice of the geese themselves,--a
cry which seemed to say, "Come here, Grayking's geese, with Grayking at
the head!" And as she stood there waiting, the sky grew black above her
head with the shadowing of wings, and the honking of the geese grew
louder and nearer till they circled and lighted in a flock at her feet.

She saw that they looked very plump and well-fed, and Grayking was the
fattest of the flock. All she did was to look at them steadily and
reproachfully; but they came waddling bashfully up to her and stood in a
line before her with drooping heads. It seemed as if something made them
stay and listen to what she had to say, although they would much rather
fly away.

Then she talked to them gently and told them how bad they were to steal
corn and spoil the harvest. And as she talked they grew to love her
tender voice, even though it scolded them. She cried bitterly as she
took each one by the wings and shook him for his sins and whipped
him--not too severely. Tears stood in the round eyes of the geese also,
not because she hurt them, for she had hardly ruffled their thick
feathers; but because they were sorry to have pained the beautiful
Saint. For they saw that she loved them, and the more she punished them
the better they loved her. Last of all she punished Grayking. But when
she had finished she took him up in her arms and kissed him before
putting him in the pen with the other geese, where she meant to keep
them in prison for a day and a night. Then Grayking hung his head, and
in his heart he promised that neither he nor his followers should ever
again steal anything, no matter how hungry they were. Now Saint Werburgh
read the thought in his heart and was glad, and she smiled as she turned
away. She was sorry to keep them in the cage, but she hoped it might do
them good. And she said to herself, "They shall have at least one good
breakfast of convent porridge before they go."

Saint Werburgh trusted Hugh, the Steward, for she did not yet know the
wickedness of his heart. So she told him how she had punished the geese
for robbing him, and how she was sure they would never do so any more.
Then she bade him see that they had a breakfast of convent porridge the
next morning; and after that they should be set free to go where they
chose.

Hugh was not satisfied. He thought the geese had not been punished
enough. And he went away grumbling, but not daring to say anything cross
to the Lady Abbess who was the King's daughter.


II.

SAINT WERBURGH was busy all the rest of that day and early the next
morning too, so she could not get out again to see the prisoned geese.
But when she went to her cell for the morning rest after her work was
done, she sat down by the window and looked out smilingly, thinking to
see her friend Grayking and the others taking their bath in the meadow.
But there were no geese to be seen! Werburgh's face grew grave. And even
as she sat there wondering what had happened, she heard a prodigious
honking overhead, and a flock of geese came straggling down, not in the
usual trim V, but all unevenly and without a leader. Grayking was gone!

They fluttered about crying and asking advice of one another, till they
heard Saint Werburgh's voice calling them anxiously. Then with a cry of
joy they flew straight up to her window and began talking all together,
trying to tell her what had happened.

"Grayking is gone!" they said. "Grayking is stolen by the wicked
Steward. Grayking was taken away when we were set free, and we shall
never see him again. What shall we do, dear lady, without our leader?"

Saint Werburgh was horrified to think that her dear Grayking might be in
danger. Oh, how that wicked Steward had deceived her! She began to feel
angry. Then she turned to the birds: "Dear geese," she said earnestly,
"you have promised me never to steal again, have you not?" and they all
honked "Yes!" "Then I will go and question the Steward," she continued,
"and if he is guilty I will punish him and make him bring Grayking back
to you."

The geese flew away feeling somewhat comforted, and Saint Werburgh sent
speedily for Master Hugh. He came, looking much surprised, for he could
not imagine what she wanted of him. "Where is the gray goose with the
black ring about his neck?" began Saint Werburgh without any preface,
looking at him keenly. He stammered and grew confused. "I--I don't know,
Lady Abbess," he faltered. He had not guessed that she cared especially
about the geese.

"Nay, you know well," said Saint Werburgh, "for I bade you feed them and
set them free this morning. But one is gone."

"A fox must have stolen it," said he guiltily.

"Ay, a fox with black hair and a red, fat face," quoth Saint Werburgh
sternly. "Do not tell me lies. You have taken him, Master Hugh. I can
read it in your heart." Then he grew weak and confessed.

"Ay, I have taken the great gray goose," he said faintly. "Was it so
very wrong?"

"He was a friend of mine and I love him dearly," said Saint Werburgh. At
these words the Steward turned very pale indeed.

"I did not know," he gasped.

"Go and bring him to me, then," commanded the Saint, and pointed to the
door. Master Hugh slunk out looking very sick and miserable and horribly
frightened. For the truth was that he had been tempted by Grayking's
fatness. He had carried the goose home and made him into a hot, juicy
pie which he had eaten for that very morning's breakfast. So how could
he bring the bird back to Saint Werburgh, no matter how sternly she
commanded?

All day long he hid in the woods, not daring to let himself be seen by
any one. For Saint Werburgh was a King's daughter; and if the King
should learn what he had done to the pet of the Lady Abbess, he might
have Hugh himself punished by being baked into a pie for the King's
hounds to eat.

But at night he could bear it no longer. He heard the voice of Saint
Werburgh calling his name very softly from the convent, "Master Hugh,
Master Hugh, come, bring me my goose!" And just as the geese could not
help coming when she called them, so he felt that he must go, whether he
would or no. He went into his pantry and took down the remains of the
great pie. He gathered up the bones of poor Grayking in a little basket,
and with chattering teeth and shaking limbs stole up to the convent and
knocked at the wicket gate.

Saint Werburgh was waiting for him. "I knew you would come," she said.
"Have you brought my goose?" Then silently and with trembling hands he
took out the bones one by one and laid them on the ground before Saint
Werburgh. So he stood with bowed head and knocking knees waiting to hear
her pronounce his punishment.

"Oh, you wicked man!" she said sadly. "You have killed my beautiful
Grayking, who never did harm to any one except to steal a little corn."

"I did not know you loved him, Lady," faltered the man in self-defense.

"You ought to have known it," she returned; "you ought to have loved him
yourself."

"I did, Lady Abbess," confessed the man. "That was the trouble. I loved
him too well--in a pie."

"Oh, selfish, gluttonous man!" she exclaimed in disgust. "Can you not
see the beauty of a dear little live creature till it is dead and fit
only for your table? I shall have you taught better. Henceforth you
shall be made to study the lives and ways of all things which live about
the convent; and never again, for punishment, shall you eat flesh of any
bird or beast. We will see if you cannot be taught to love them when
they have ceased to mean Pie. Moreover, you shall be confined for two
days and two nights in the pen where I kept the geese. And porridge
shall be your only food the while. Go, Master Hugh."

So the wicked Steward was punished. But he learned his lesson; and after
a little while he grew to love the birds almost as well as Saint
Werburgh herself.

But she had not yet finished with Grayking. After Master Hugh had gone
she bent over the pitiful little pile of bones which was all that was
left of that unlucky pie. A tear fell upon them from her beautiful eyes;
and kneeling down she touched them with her white fingers, speaking
softly the name of the bird whom she had loved.

[Illustration: SAINT WERBURGH & HER GOOSE]

"Grayking, arise," she said. And hardly had the words left her mouth
when a strange thing happened. The bones stirred, lifted themselves, and
in a moment a glad "Honk!" sounded in the air, and Grayking himself,
black ring and all, stood ruffling his feathers before her. She clasped
him in her arms and kissed him again and again. Then calling the rest of
the flock by her strange power, she showed them their lost leader
restored as good as new.

What a happy flock of geese flew honking away in an even V, with the
handsomest, grayest, plumpest goose in all the world at their head! And
what an exciting story he had to tell his mates! Surely, no other goose
ever lived who could tell how it felt to be made into pie, to be eaten
and to have his bones picked clean by a greedy Steward.

This is how Saint Werburgh made lifelong friendship with a flock of big
gray geese. And I dare say even now in England one of their descendants
may be found with a black ring around his neck, the handsomest, grayest,
plumpest goose in all the world. And when he hears the name of Saint
Werburgh, which has been handed down to him from grandfather to
grandson for twelve hundred years, he will give an especially loud
"Honk!" of praise.

Dear Saint Werburgh! One would almost be willing to make a goose of
himself if so he might see her again, with all her feathered friends
about her.



