WERWOLVES AND WITCHES

Other instances of werwolves of a benignant nature are to be found in
the "Bisclaveret" in Marie de France's poem, composed in 1200 A.D.; and
in the hero of "William and the Werwolf" (translated from the French
about 1350).

To inflict the evil property of werwolfery upon those against whom
they--or some other--bore a grudge was, in the Middle Ages, a method of
revenge frequently resorted to by witches; and countless knights and
ladies were thus victimized. Nor were such practices confined to ancient
times; for as late as the eighteenth century a case of this kind of
witchcraft is reported to have happened in the vicinity of Blois.

In a village some three miles from Blois, on the outskirts of a forest,
dwelt an innkeeper called Antonio Cellini, who, as the name suggests,
was of Italian origin. Antonio had only one child, Beatrice, a very
pretty girl, who at the time of this story was about nineteen years of
age. As might be expected, Beatrice had many admirers; but none were so
passionately attached to her as Herbert Poyer, a handsome youth, and one
Henri Sangfeu, an extremely plain youth. Beatrice--and one can scarcely
blame her for it--preferred Herbert, and with the whole-hearted approval
of her father consented to marry him. Sangfeu was not unnaturally upset;
but, in all probability, he would have eventually resigned himself to
the inevitable, had it not been for a village wag, who in an idle moment
wrote a poem and entitled it

     "_Sansfeu the Ugly; or, Love Unrequited._"

The poem, which was illustrated with several clever caricatures of the
unfortunate Henri and contained much caustic wit, took like wildfire in
the village; and Henri, in consequence, had a very bad time. Eventually
it was shown to Beatrice, and it was then that the climax was reached.
Although Henri was present at the moment, unable to restrain herself,
she went into peals of laughter at the drawings, saying over and over
again: "How like him--how very like! His nose to a nicety! It is
certainly correct to style him Sansfeu--for no one could call him
Sansnez!"

Her mirth was infectious; every one joined in; only Henri slunk away,
crimson with rage and mortification. He hated Beatrice now as much as he
had loved her before; and he thirsted only for revenge.

Some distance from the village and in the heart of the forest lived an
old woman known as Mere Maxim, who was said to be a witch, and,
therefore, shunned by every one. All sorts of unsavoury stories were
told of her, and she was held responsible for several outbreaks of
epidemics--hitherto unknown in the neighbourhood--many accidents, and
more than one death.

The spot where she lived was carefully avoided. Those who ventured far
in the forest after nightfall either never came back at all or returned
half imbecile with terror, and afterwards poured out to their affrighted
friends incoherent stories of the strange lights and terrible forms they
had encountered, moving about amid the trees. Up to the present Henri
had been just as scared by these tales as the rest of the villagers; but
so intense was his longing for revenge that he at length resolved to
visit Mere Maxim and solicit her assistance. Choosing a morning when the
sun was shining brightly, he screwed up his courage, and after many bad
scares finally succeeded in reaching her dwelling--or, I might say, her
shanty, for by a more appropriate term than the latter such a
queer-looking untidy habitation could not be described. To his
astonishment Mere Maxim was by no means so unprepossessing as he had
imagined. On the contrary, she was more than passably good-looking, with
black hair, rosy cheeks, and exceedingly white teeth. What he did not
altogether like were her eyes--which, though large and well shaped, had
in them an occasional glitter--and her hands, which, though remarkably
white and slender, had very long and curved nails, that to his mind
suggested all sorts of unpleasant ideas. She was becomingly dressed in
brown--brown woolly garments, with a brown fur cap, brown stockings, and
brown shoes ornamented with very bright silver buckles. Altogether she
was decidedly chic; and if a little incongruous in her surroundings,
such incongruity only made her the more alluring; and as far as Henri
was concerned rather added to her charms.

At all events, he needed no second invitation to seat himself by her
side in the chimney-corner, and his heart thumped as it had never
thumped before when she encouraged him to put his arm round her waist
and kiss her. It was the first time a woman had ever suffered him to
kiss her without violent protestations and avowals of disgust.

"You are not very handsome, it is true," Mere Maxim remarked, "but you
are fat--and I like fat young men," and she pinched his cheeks playfully
and patted his hands. "Are you sure no one knows you have come to see
me?" she asked.

"Certain!" Henri replied; "I haven't confided in a soul; I haven't even
so much as dropped a hint that I intended seeing you."

"That is good!" Mere Maxim said. "Tell no one, otherwise I shall not be
able to help you. Also, on no account let the girl Beatrice think you
bear her animosity. Be civil and friendly to her whenever you meet; then
give her, as a wedding present, this belt and box of bonbons." So
saying, she handed him a beautiful belt composed of the skin of some
wild animal and fastened with a gold buckle, and a box of delicious pink
and white sugarplums. "Do not give her these things till the marriage
eve," she added, "and directly you have given them come and see
me--always observing the greatest secrecy." She then kissed him, and he
went away brimming over with passion for her, and longing feverishly for
the hour to arrive when he could be with her again.

All day and all night he thought of her--of her gay and sparkling
beauty, of her kisses and caresses, and the delightful coolness of her
thin and supple hands. His mad infatuation for her made him oblivious
to the taunts and jeers of the villagers, who seldom saw him without
making ribald allusion to the poem.

"There goes Sansfeu! alias Monsieur Grosnez!" they called out. "Why
don't you cut off your nose for a present to mademoiselle? She would
then have no need to buy a kitchen poker. Ha! ha! ha!" But their coarse
wit fell flat. Henri hardly heard it--all his thoughts, his burning
love, his unquenchable passion, were centred in Mere Maxim: in spirit he
was with her, alone with her, in the innermost recesses of the grim,
silent forest.

The marriage eve came; he handed Beatrice the presents, and ere she had
time to thank him--for the magnificence of the belt rendered her
momentarily speechless--he had flown from the house, and was hurrying as
fast as his legs could carry him to his tryst. The shadows of night were
already on the forest when he entered it; and the silence and solitude
of the place, the indistinct images of the trees, and their dismal
sighing, that seemed to foretell a storm, all combined to disturb his
fancy and raise strange spectres in his imagination. The shrill hooting
of an owl, as it rustled overhead, caused him an unprecedented shock,
and the great rush of blood to his head made him stagger and clutch
hold of the nearest object for support. He had barely recovered from
this alarm when his eyes almost started out of their sockets with fright
as he caught sight of a queer shape gliding silently from tree to tree;
and shortly afterwards he was again terrified--this time by a pale face,
whether of a human being or animal he could not say, peering down at him
from the gnarled and fantastic branches of a gigantic oak. He was now so
frightened that he ran, and queer--indefinably queer footsteps ran after
him, and followed him persistently until he reached the shanty, when he
heard them turn and leap lightly away.

On this occasion, the occurrence of Henri's second visit, Mere Maxim was
more captivating than ever. She was dressed with wonderful effect all in
white. She wore sparkling jewels at her throat and waist, buckles of
burnished gold on her shoes; her teeth flashed like polished ivory, and
her nails like agates. Henri was enraptured. He fell on his knees before
her, he caught her hands and covered them with kisses.

"How nice you look to-day, my sweetheart," she said; "and how fat! It
does my heart good to see you. Come in, and sit close to me, and tell me
how you have fared."

She led him in, and after locking and barring the door, conducted him
to the chimney-corner. And there he lay in her arms. She fondled him;
she pressed her lips on his, and gleefully felt his cheeks and arms. And
after a time, when, intoxicated with the joy of it all, he lay still and
quiet, wishing only to remain like that for eternity, she stooped down,
and, fetching a knot of cord from under the seat, began laughingly to
bind his hands and feet. And at each turn and twist of the rope she
laughed the louder. And when she had finished binding his arms and legs
she made him lie on his back, and lashed him so tightly to the seat
that, had he possessed the strength of six men, he could not have freed
himself.

Then she sat beside him, and moving aside the clothes that covered his
chest and throat, said:--

"By this time Beatrice--pretty Beatrice, vain and sensual Beatrice, the
Beatrice you once loved and admired so much--will have worn the belt,
will have eaten the sweets. She is now a werwolf. Every night at twelve
o'clock she will creep out of bed and glide about the house and village
in search of human prey, some bonny babe, or weak, defenceless woman,
but always some one fat, tender, and juicy--some one like you." And
bending low over him, she bared her teeth, and dug her cruel nails deep
into his flesh. A flame from the wood fire suddenly shot up. It
flickered oddly on the figure of Mere Maxim--so oddly that Henri
received a shock. He realized with an awful thrill that the face into
which he peered was no longer that of a human being; it was--but he
could no longer think--he could only gaze.



