THE CASE OF SERGEANT BERTRAND

The case of Sergeant Bertrand, which is the last authenticated case of
this kind, occurred in 1847, when, on the 10th of July, an investigation
was held before a military council presided over by Colonel Manselon.
For some months the cemeteries in and around Paris had been the scenes
of frightful violations, the culprits (or culprit), in some
extraordinary manner, eluding every attempt made to ensnare them. At one
time the custodians of the cemeteries were suspected, then the local
police, and for a brief space suspicion fell even on the relations of
the dead. The first burial-place to be so mysteriously visited was the
Cemetery of Pere Lachaise. Here, at night, those in charge declared
they saw a strange form, partly human and partly animal, glide about
from tomb to tomb. Try how they would they could not catch it--it always
vanished--vanished just like a phantom directly they came up to it; and
the dogs when urged to seize it would only bark and howl, and show
indications of the most abject terror.

Always when morning broke the ravages of this unsavoury visitant were
only too plainly visible--graves had been dug up, coffins burst open,
and the contents nibbled, and gnawed, and scattered all over the ground.
Expert medical opinion was sought, but with no fresh result. The
doctors, too, were agreed that the mutilations of the dead were produced
by the bites of what certainly seemed to be human teeth.

The sensation caused by this announcement was without parallel; and one
and all, old and young, rich and poor, were wanting to know whatever
sort of being it could be that possessed so foul an appetite. The watch
was doubled; all to no purpose. A young soldier was arrested, but on
declaring he had merely entered the cemetery to meet a friend, and
exhibiting no evidences of guilt, was let go.

At length the violation ceased in Pere Lachaise and broke out elsewhere.
A little girl, greatly beloved by her relatives and friends, died, and
a big concourse of people attended the funeral. On the following
morning, to the intense indignation of every one, the grave was
discovered dug up, the coffin forced open, and the body half eaten. In
its wild fury at such an unheard-of atrocity the public called loudly
for the culprit. The father of the dead girl was first of all arrested,
but his innocence being quickly established, he was set free. Every
means was then taken to guard against any recurrence, but in spite of
all precautions the same thing happened again shortly afterwards; and
happened repeatedly. The fact that the cemetery was surrounded by very
high walls, and that iron gates, which were always kept shut, formed the
only legitimate entrance, added to the mystery, and made it seem
impossible that any creature of solid flesh and blood could be
responsible for the outrages.

Having observed that at one place, in particular, the wall, though
nearly ten feet high, showed signs of having been frequently scaled, an
old army officer set a trap there, consisting of a wire connected with
an explosive, which was so arranged that no one could climb over the
wall without treading on the wire and causing an explosion.

A strong posse of detectives kept watch, and at midnight a loud report
was heard. The detectives were not, however, as quick as their quarry.
They saw a man, or what they took to be a man, and fired at him, but he
was gone like a flash of lightning, scaling the wall with the agility of
a monkey. Finding a trail of blood, however, and pieces of torn uniform
accompanying the bloodstains, they concluded that the enemy was wounded,
and that the marauder was, moreover, a soldier.

Still, it is doubtful whether his identity would have been proved, had
not one of the grave-diggers of the cemetery chanced to overhear some
sappers of the 74th Regiment remark that on the preceding night one of
their comrades--a sergeant--had been conveyed to the military hospital
of Val de Grace badly wounded. The matter was at once inquired into, and
the wounded soldier, Sergeant Bertrand, was found to be the author of
the long series of hideous violations. Bertrand freely confessed his
guilt, declaring that he was driven to it against his own will by some
external force he could not define, and which allowed him no peace. He
had, he said, in one night exhumed and bitten as many as fifteen bodies.
He employed no implements, but tore up the soil after the manner of a
wild beast, paying no heed to the bruising and laceration of his hands
so long as he could get at the dead. He could not describe what his
sensations were like when he was thus occupied; he only knew that he
was not himself but some ravenous, ferocious animal. He added, that
after these nocturnal expeditions he invariably fell into a profound
sleep, often before he could get home, and that always, during that
sleep, he was conscious of undergoing peculiar metamorphosis. When
interrogated, he informed the court of inquiry that, as a child, he
preferred the company of all kinds of animals to that of his fellow
creatures, and that in order to get in close touch with his four-footed
friends he used to frequent the most solitary and out-of-the-way
places--moors, woods, and deserts. He said that it was immediately after
one of these excursions that he first experienced the sensation of
undergoing some great change in his sleep, and that the following
evening, when passing close to a cemetery where the grave-diggers were
covering a body that had just been interred, yielding to a sudden
impulse, he crept in and watched them. A sharp shower of rain
interrupting their labours, they went away, leaving their task
unfinished. "At the sight of the coffin," Bertrand said, "horrible
desires seized me; my head throbbed, my heart palpitated, and had it not
been for the timely arrival of friends I should have then and there
yielded to my inclinations. From that time forth I was never
free--these terrible cravings invariably came on directly after sunset."

Medical men who examined Bertram unanimously gave it as their opinion
that he was sane, and could only account for his extraordinary nocturnal
actions by the supposition that he must be the victim of some strange
monomania. His companions, with whom he was most popular, all testified
to his amiability and lovable disposition. In the end he was sentenced
to a year's imprisonment, and after his release was never again heard
of. There can, I think, be little doubt, from what he himself said, that
he was in reality a werwolf. His preference for the society of animals
and love of isolated regions; his sudden fallings asleep and sensations
of undergoing metamorphosis, though that metamorphosis was spiritual and
metaphysical only, which is very often the case, all help to
substantiate that belief.

