VAMPIRISM AND LYCANTHROPY

It has been asserted that Bertrand was a vampire; but there are
absolutely no grounds for associating him with vampirism. A vampire is
an Elemental that under certain conditions inhabits a dead body, whether
human or otherwise; and, thus incarcerated, comes out of a grave at
night to suck the blood of a living person. It never touches the dead.

A werwolf has already been defined. It has an existence entirely
separate from the vampire. The werwolf feeds on both the living and
dead, which it bites and mangles after the nature of all beasts of prey.

Vampirism is infectious; every one who has been sucked by a vampire, on
physical dissolution, becomes a vampire, and remains one until his
corpse is destroyed in a certain prescribed manner. Lycanthropy is not
infectious.

There are many well-authenticated cases of vampirism in France and
Germany. In a newspaper published in the reign of Louis XV there
appeared an announcement to the effect that Arnold Paul, a native of
Madveiga, being crushed to death by a wagon and buried, had since become
a vampire, and that he had been previously bitten by one. The
authorities being informed of the terror his visits were occasioning,
and several people having died with all the symptoms of vampirism, his
grave was opened; and although he had been dead forty days his body was
like that of a very full-blooded, living man.

Following the mode of exorcism traditionally observed on such occasions,
a stake was driven into the corpse, whereupon it uttered a frightful
cry--half human and half animal; after which its head was cut off, and
trunk and head burned. Four other bodies which had died from the
consequences of the bites, and which were found in the same perfectly
healthy condition, were served in a similar manner; and it was hoped
these vigorous measures would end the mischief. But no such thing; cases
of deaths from the same cause--_i.e._, loss of blood--still continued,
and five years afterwards became so rife that the authorities were
compelled to take the matter up for the second time. On this occasion
the graves of many people, of all ages and both sexes, were opened, and
the bodies of all those suspected of plaguing the living by their
nocturnal visits were found in the vampire state--full almost to
overflowing with blood, and free from every symptom of death. On their
being served in the same manner as the corpse of Arnold Paul the
epidemic of vampirism ceased, and no more cases of it have since been
reported as occurring in that district. A rumour of these proceedings
reaching the ears of Louis XV, he at once ordered his Minister at Vienna
to report upon them. This was done. The documents forwarded to the King
(and which are still in existence) give a detailed account of all the
occurrences to which I have referred. They bear the date of June 7,
1732, and are signed and witnessed by three surgeons and several other
persons.

The facts, which are indubitable, point to no other satisfactory
explanation saving that of vampirism--an explanation that finds ample
corroboration in thousands of like cases reported, at one time or
another, in every country in Eastern Europe.

