THE CASE OF CONSTANCE ARMANDE, GHOUL

_A propos_ of ghouls, the following incident was related to me as having
occurred recently in Brittany. A young girl named Constance Armande, in
a good station of life, much against the wishes of her family, took up
spiritualism and constantly attended seances. At these seances she
witnessed all sorts of phenomena--some in all probability produced by
mere trickery on the part of the medium or a confederate, whilst
others were, without doubt, the manifestations of _bona fide_
spirits--earthbound phantasms of the lowest and most undesirable
order--murderers, lunatics, Vice Elementals, and ghouls. It is most
unwise to risk coming in contact with such spirits, for when they have
once made your acquaintance they will attach themselves to you, and are
got rid of only with the greatest difficulty. They were most unremitting
in their persecution of Constance Armande; they followed her home, and
were always rapping on the walls of her room and disturbing and annoying
her. In short, she got no peace, either asleep or awake. In the night
she would often wake up screaming, and in an agony of mind rush into her
parents' room and implore their protection, declaring she had dreamed in
the most vivid manner possible that frightful-looking creatures, too
awful for her to describe, were trying to prevent her awaking in order
to keep her with them always. She told a spiritualist, and he informed
her that such dreams were not in reality dreams at all, but
projections--that she had, at seances, acquired the power of projection;
and, having no control over that power, she projected herself
unconsciously, the projection almost always taking place in her sleep.

A medical expert was also consulted, and in accordance with his advice
Constance Armande went to the seaside and resorted to every kind of
pleasure--balls, concerts, and theatres. But the annoyances still
continued, and she was seldom permitted to rest a whole night without
being disturbed in a most harrowing manner.

Being a really beautiful girl, she had countless admirers, and
eventually she became engaged to Alphonse Mabane, the only son of a very
wealthy widow.

Shortly before the day fixed for their marriage Madame Mabane was seized
with a fit of apoplexy and died. Every one, especially Constance
Armande, was overwhelmed with grief, whilst preparations were made for a
most impressive funeral.

On the afternoon of the day preceding that on which the funeral was to
take place Constance, complaining of a bad headache, went to lie down
on her bed, and two hours later strange footsteps were heard coming out
of her room and bounding down the stairs. Wondering who it could be,
Madame Armande ran to look, and was astonished beyond measure to see
Constance--but a Constance she hardly knew--a Constance with the glitter
of a ferocious beast in her eyes, and a grim, savage expression in the
corners of her mouth. She did not appear to notice her mother, but
passed her by with a light, stealthy tread, utterly unlike her usual
walk, crossed the hall, and went out at the front door. Madame Armande
was too startled to try and intercept her, or even to make any remark,
and returned to the drawing-room greatly agitated. As hour after hour
passed and Constance did not come home, her alarm increased, and she
mentioned the incident to her husband, who caused immediate inquiries to
be made. Just about the hour the family usually retired to rest there
came a violent ring at the front-door bell. It was Alphonse Mabane, pale
and ghastly.

"Have you found her?" Monsieur and Madame Armande cried, catching hold
of him in their agitation, and dragging him into the hall.

Alphonse nodded. "Let me sit down a moment first," he gasped. "It will
give me time to collect my senses. My nerves are all to pieces!"

He sank into a chair, and, burying his face in his hands, shook
convulsively. Monsieur and Madame Armande stood and watched him in
agonized silence. After some minutes--to the Armandes it seemed an
eternity--spent in this fashion, Alphonse raised his head. "Your
servant," he said, "came to my house at nine o'clock and asked if
Mademoiselle Constance was with me. I said 'No,' that I had not seen her
all day, and was much alarmed when I was informed that she had left home
early in the afternoon and had not yet returned. I said I would join in
the search for her, and was in my bedroom putting on my overcoat, when
there came a tap at my door, and Jacques, my valet, with a face as white
as a sheet, begged me to go with him upstairs. He led me to the door of
my mother's room, where she lay in her coffin, not yet screwed down.
'Hark!' he whispered, touching me on the sleeve, 'do you hear that?'

"I listened, and from the interior of the room came a curious noise like
munching--a steady gnaw, gnaw, gnaw. 'I heard it just now,' he
whispered, 'when I was going to shut the landing window--and other
sounds, too. Hush!'

"I held my breath, and heard distinctly the swishing and rustling of a
dress.

"'Have you been in?' I asked.

"He shook his head. 'I daren't,' he whispered. 'I wouldn't go in by
myself if you were to offer me a million pounds,' and he trembled so
violently that he had to lean against me for support.

"A great terror then seized me, and bidding Jacques follow, I crept
downstairs and summoned the rest of the servants. Armed with sticks and
lights, we then went in a body to my mother's room, and throwing open
the door, rushed in.

"The lid of the coffin was off, the corpse was lying huddled up on the
floor, and crouching over it was Constance. For God's sake don't ask me
to describe more--the sounds we heard explained everything. When she saw
us she emitted a series of savage snarls, sprang at one of the maids,
scratched her in the face, and before we could stop her, flew downstairs
and out into the street. As soon as our shocked senses had sufficiently
recovered we started off in pursuit, but have not been able to find the
slightest trace of her."

At the conclusion of Monsieur Mabane's story the search was continued.
The police were summoned, and a general hue and cry raised, with the
result that Constance was eventually found in a cemetery digging
frantically at a newly made grave.

At last brought to bay in the chase that ensued, fortunately for her
and for all concerned, she plunged into a river, was swept away by the
current, and drowned.

This case of Constance Armande seems to me to be clearly a case of
ghoulism. What the spiritualist had told her was correct--she had
projected herself unconsciously, and the hideous things she imagined
were phantoms in a dream were Elementals--ghouls--her projected spirit
encountered on the superphysical plane.

After sundry efforts to steal her body when she was thus separated from
it, one of them had at length succeeded, and, incarcerated in her
beautiful frame, had hastened to satisfy its craving for human carrion.



