CHAPTER XII

THE WERWOLF IN SPAIN


Werwolves are, perhaps, rather less common in Spain than in any other
part of Europe. They are there almost entirely confined to the
mountainous regions (more particularly to the Sierra de Guadarrama, the
Cantabrian, and the Pyrenees), and are usually of the male species.
Generally speaking the property of lycanthropy in Spain appears to be
hereditary; and, as one would naturally expect in a country so
pronouncedly Roman Catholic, to rid the lycanthropist of his unenviable
property it is the custom to resort to exorcism. Though they are
extremely rare, both flowers and streams possessing the power of
transmitting the property of werwolfery are to be found in the
Cantabrian mountains and the Pyrenees.

And in Spain, as in Austria-Hungary, precious stones--particularly
rubies--not infrequently, and often with disastrous results, attract
the werwolf.

The following case of a Spanish werwolf may be taken as typical:--

In the month of September, 1853, a young man, one Paul Nicholas, arrived
from Paris at Pamplona, and took up his abode at l'Hotel Hervada.

He was rich, idle, sleek; and the sole object of his stay at Pamplona
was the pursuit of some little adventure wherewith he might be
temporarily employed, and whereof perchance he might afterwards boast.
Well, in the hotel there had arrived, a day or two before Monsieur
Nicholas, a young and beautiful lady, the effect of whose personal
attractions was intensified by certain mysterious circumstances. No one
knew her; she had no one with her--not even a servant to be bribed--and
although eminently fitted to shine in society, she went neither to the
opera nor the dance. As may be readily understood, she was soon the sole
topic of conversation in the hotel. Every one talked of her rare beauty,
elegance, and musical genius, and immediately after dinner, when she
retired to her room, many of the guests would steal upstairs after her,
and, stationing themselves outside her door, would remain there for
hours to listen to her singing.

Paul Nicholas's head was completely turned. To have such a neighbour,
with the face and voice of an angel, and yet not to know her! It was
enough to drive him wild. At last, to every one's surprise, the
mysterious lady, apparently so exclusive, permitted the advances of a
very commonplace, middle-aged gentleman with hardly a hair on his head
and a paunch that was voted quite disgusting.

The friendship between the two ripened fast. In defiance of all
conventionality, the lady took to sitting out late at night with her
elderly admirer, and, with an absolute disregard of decorum, accompanied
him on long excursions. Finally, she went away with him altogether. On
the occasion of this latter event every one in the hotel heaved a sigh
of relief, saving Paul.

Paul was disconsolate. He stayed on, hovering about the places she had
most frequented, and hoping to see in every fresh arrival at the hotel
his adored one come back. His pitiable condition gained no sympathy.

"Silly fellow!" was the general comment. "He is desperately in love! And
with such a creature! What an idiot!"

But Paul's patience was at length rewarded, his devotion apparently
justified, for the lady returned, unaccompanied; and so great was the
charm of her personality that within two days of her reappearance she
had completely won back the hearts of her fellow-guests. Again every
one raved of her.

Meanwhile, Paul Nicholas became more enamoured than ever. He bought a
guitar, and composed love lyrics--which he sang outside her door, from
morning till night, with all that wealth of tenderness so uniquely
expressible in a human voice--but it was all in vain. For the lady,
whose name had at last leaked out--it was Isabelle de Nurrez--had
yielded to the attentions of another stout, middle-aged gentleman, with
whom in due course she departed.

This was too much even for her most ardent admirers. Every guest in the
hotel protested, and petitioned that she might not be readmitted.

But mine host shook his head with scant apology. "I cannot help it," he
said. "The lady pays more for her rooms than all the rest of you put
together, so why should I turn her out? After all, if she likes to have
many sweethearts, why shouldn't she? It is her own concern, neither
yours nor mine. It harms no one!"

And some of the guests, seeing logic in their landlord's views,
remained; others went. As for Paul, he was immeasurably shocked at the
bad taste of his adored one; but he stayed on, and within a few days, as
he had fondly hoped, the fickle creature returned--and, as before,
returned alone. It was then that he resolved on writing to her. With a
crow-quill almost as fine as the long silky eyelashes of Isabella, on a
sheet of paper whose border of Cupids, grapes, vases, and roses left
little--too little--space for writing, he indited his letter, which,
when completed, he sealed with a seal of azure blue wax, bearing the
device of a dove ready for flight. And so scented was this epistle that
it perfumed the entire hotel in its transit by means of a servant (well
paid for the purpose) to mademoiselle's room. Again--this time for an
endless amount of trouble and expense--Paul was rewarded. When next he
met mademoiselle, and an opportune moment arrived, she looked at him,
and as her lovely eyes scanned his manly, if somewhat portly figure, she
smiled--smiled a smile of satisfaction which meant much. Paul Nicholas
was in ecstasies. He hardly knew how to contain himself; he sighed,
radiated, and wriggled about to such an extent that the attention of
every one in the place was directed to him; whereupon Mlle de Nurrez
turned very red and frowned. Paul's expectations now sank to zero; for
the rest of the day he was almost too miserable to live. But Mlle de
Nurrez, no doubt perceiving him to be truly penitent for having so
embarrassed her, forgave him, and on his way to dinner he received a
note in her own pretty handwriting giving him permission to make her
acquaintance without any further introduction. The way thus paved,
Monsieur Paul Nicholas, overjoyed, lost no time in seeking out the lady.
She was singing a wild sweet song as he entered her sitting-room, and
her back, turned to the door, gave him an opportunity of observing, as
she leant over her guitar, the most exquisite shoulders and the
prettiest-shaped head in the world. With graceful confusion she rose to
greet him, and her long eyelashes fell over eyes black and brilliant as
those that awakened the furore of two continents--the eyes of Lola
Montez. She was dressed in white; her rich dark hair was held in place
with combs of gold; her girdle was of gold, and so also were the massive
bracelets on her arms, which--so perfect was their symmetry--might well
have been fashioned by a sculptor.

Monsieur Paul Nicholas, with the air of a prince, escorted her to the
dining-room; and over champagne, coffee, and liqueurs their friendship
grew apace. Some hours later, when ensconced together in a cosy retreat
on the terrace, and the fast disappearing lights in the hotel windows
warned them it would soon be prudent to retire, Mlle de Nurrez exclaimed
with a sigh:--

"You have told me so much about yourself, whilst I--I have told you
nothing in return. Alas! I have a history. My parents are dead--my
mother died when I was a baby, and my father, who was a very wealthy
man--having accumulated his money in the business of a cork merchant
which he carried on for years in Portugal--died just six months ago. He
was on a voyage for his health in the Mediterranean, when he formed an
acquaintance with a young Hindu, Prince Dajarah who soon acquired
unbounded influence over him. My father died on this voyage, and--God
forgive my suspicions!--but his death was strange and sudden. On opening
his will, it was found that all his property was left to me--but only on
the condition that I married Prince Dajarah."

"Marry a black man! Mon Dieu, how terrible!" Paul Nicholas cried.

"You are right. It was terrible!" Mlle de Nurrez went on. "And if I
refused to marry Prince Dajarah, he, according to the will, would
inherit everything. Well, Prince Dajarah was persistent; he declared
that it was my duty to marry him, to fulfil my father's dying wish. It
was in vain that I implored his mercy--that I told him I could never
return his affections. And at last, finding that upon Prince Dajarah
neither remonstrance nor reproach had any effect, I fled to a town some
ten miles distant from this hotel, taking with me what money and
jewellery I possessed.

"Alas! he soon discovered my whereabouts, and with the sole object of
continuing his persecution of me, speedily established himself in the
house--which, unfortunately for me, happened to be vacant--next to mine.
My money is nearly exhausted, I have no resources, and unless some one
intervenes, some one brave and fearless, some one who really loves me, I
shall undoubtedly be forced into a marriage with this odious wretch.
Heavens, the bare idea of it is poisonous! You remember the two men who
paid such marked attentions to me a short time ago?"

Paul Nicholas nodded. His emotion was such he could not speak.

"They both imagined they were in love with me. They swore they would
confront the black tyrant and kill him; but when they were put to the
test--when I took them and pointed him out to them--they went white as a
sheet, and--fled."

"Why torture me thus?" Paul Nicholas cried. "Tell me--only tell me what
it is you want me to do!"

"Do you love me?"

"More than my life."

"More than your soul?"

"More than my soul."

"Will you save me from a fate more horrible than death?"

"If I go to Hell for you--yes!" Paul said, gazing on a face lovely as a
dream.

"You must come with me to his house to-morrow then! You must come armed.
You must kill him."

"Kill him!" Paul cried, turning pale.

"Well?"

"But it will be murder--assassination."

"Murder, to kill him--a tyrant--a black man! Bah! Are you too a coward?"
And she sprang to her feet, the veins swelling on her white brow, her
cheeks colouring, her eyes flashing fire, as if she, at least, knew not
the meaning of fear. "Sooner than let such a wretch inherit my father's
wealth," she cried out, "I will kill him myself--kill him, or perish in
the attempt."

Paul Nicholas encountered the earnest gaze of her large, bright eyes,
the pleading of her beautiful mouth, and the sweetness of her breath
fanned his nostrils. A terrific wave of passion swept over him. He loved
as he had never loved before--as he had never deemed it possible to
love: and in his mad worship of the woman he believed to be as pure as
she was fair, he forgot that the devil hides safest where he is least
suspected. Seizing her small white hands in his, he swore upon them to
do her will; and he would have gone on making all sorts of wild,
impassioned speeches had not Mlle de Nurrez reminded him that it was
past locking-up time.

She crossed the main hall of the hotel with him, and as she turned to
bid him good night prior to ascending to her quarters, her eyes met
his--met his in one long, lingering glance that he assured himself could
only have meant love.

Next morning the guests in the hotel received another shock. Mlle de
Nurrez had gone off again--this time with Monsieur Paul Nicholas--that
good-looking, well-to-do young man, at whom all the matrons with
marriageable daughters had in vain cast longing eyes.

Now, although Paul Nicholas had little knowledge of geography, he could
not help remarking, as he journeyed with Mlle Nurrez, that their route
was in an exactly opposite direction to that leading to the town which
his companion had named to him as her place of residence. He pointed out
his difficulty, but Mlle de Nurrez only laughed.

"Wait!" she said. "Wait and see. We shall get there all right. You must
trust to my wit."

Paul Nicholas made no further comment. He was already in the seventh
heaven--that was enough for him; and leaning back, he continued gazing
at her profile.

The afternoon passed away, the sun sank, and night and its shadows moved
solemnly on them. Gradually the roadside trees became distinguishable
only as deeper masses of shadow, and Paul Nicholas could only tell they
were trees by the peculiar sodden odour that, from time to time,
sluggishly flowed in at the open window of the carriage. Of necessity,
they were proceeding slowly--the road was for the most part uphill, and
the horses, though tough and hardy natives of the mountains, had begun
to show signs of flagging. They did not pass by a soul, and even the
sighs of astonished cattle, whose ruminating slumbers they had routed,
at last became events of the greatest rarity. At each yard they advanced
the wildness of the country increased, and although the landscape was
hidden, its influence was felt. Paul Nicholas knew, as well as if he had
seen them, that he was in the presence of grotesque, isolated boulders,
wide patches of bare, desolate soil, gaunt trees, and profound
straggling fissures.

Being so long confined in a limited space, although in that space was a
paradise, he felt the exquisite agony of cramp, and when, after sundry
attempts to stretch himself, he at length found a position that afforded
him temporary relief, it was only to become aware of a more refined
species of torture. The springs of the carriage rising and falling
regularly, produced a rhythmical beat, which began to painfully absorb
his attention, and to slowly merge into a senseless echo of one of his
observations to Mlle de Nurrez. And when he was becoming reconciled to
this inferno, another forced itself upon him. How quiet the driver was!
Was there any driver? He couldn't see any. Possibly, nay, probably--why
not?--the driver was lying gagged and bound on the roadside, and a
bandit, one of the notorious Spanish bandits, against whom his friends
in Paris had so emphatically warned him, was on the box driving him to
his obscure lair in the heart of the mountains. Or was the original
driver himself a bandit, and the beautiful girl reclining on the
cushions a bandit's daughter? He dozed, and on coming to his waking
senses again, discovered that the darkness had slightly lifted. He could
see the distant horizon, defined by inky woods, outlined on a lighter
sky. A few stars, scattered here and there in this tableau, whilst
emphasizing the vastness of the space overhead--a vastness that was
positively annihilating--at the same time conveyed a sense of solitude
and loneliness, in perfect harmony with the trees, and rocks, and
gorges. The effect was only transitory, for with a suddenness almost
reminding one of stage mechanism, the moon burst through its temporary
covering of clouds, and in a moment the whole country-side was illumined
with a soft white glow. It was a warm night, and the breeze that rolled
down from the mountain peaks, so remote and passionless, was charged to
overflowing with resinous odours, mingled with which, and just strong
enough to be recognizable, was the faint, pungent smell of decay. A
couple of hares, looking somewhat ashamed of themselves, sprang into
upright positions, and with frightened whisks of their tails disappeared
into a clump of ferns. With a startled hiss a big snake drew back under
cover of a boulder, and a hawk, balked of its prey by the sudden
brilliant metamorphosis, uttered an indignant croak. But none of these
protests against the moon's innocent behaviour were heeded by Paul
Nicholas, whose whole attention was riveted on a large sombre building
standing close by the side of the road. At the first glimpse of the
place, so huge, grim, and silent, he was seized with a sensation of
absolute terror. Nothing mortal could surely inhabit such a house. The
dark, frowning walls and vacant, eye-like windows threw back a thousand
shadows, and suggested as many eerie fancies--fancies that were
corroborated by a few rank sedges and two or three white trunks of
decayed trees that rose up on either side of the building; but of
life--human life--there was not the barest suspicion.

"What a nightmare of a house!" Paul Nicholas exclaimed, gazing with a
shudder upon the remodelled and inverted images of the grey sedge, the
ghastly tree-stems, and the vacant, eye-like windows in a black and
lurid tarn that lay in unruffled lustre along the edge of the wood.

"It's where he lives!" Mlle de Nurrez whispered.

"What! do you mean to say that it is to this house you have brought me?"
Paul shrieked. "To this awful, deserted ghostly mansion! Why have you
lied to me?"

"I was afraid you wouldn't care to come if I described the place too
accurately," Mlle de Nurrez said. "Forgive me--and pity me, too, for it
is here that Prince Dajarah would have me spend my life."

Paul trembled.

"For God's sake, don't desert me!" Mlle de Nurrez exclaimed, laying her
hand softly on his shoulder. "Think of the terrible fate that will
befall me! Think of your promises, your vows!"

But Paul Nicholas did not respond all at once. His brain was in a
whirl. He had been deceived, cruelly deceived! And with what motive? Was
Mlle de Nurrez's explanation genuine? Could there be anything genuine
about a girl who told an untruth? Once a liar always a liar! Did not
that maxim hold good? Was it not one he had heard repeatedly from
childhood? What should he do? What could he do? He was here, alone with
this woman and her coachman, in one of the wildest and most outlandish
regions of Spain. God alone knew where! To attempt to return would be
hopeless--sheer imbecility; he would most certainly get lost on the
mountains, and perish from hunger and thirst, or fall over some
precipice, or into the jaws of a bear; or, at all events, come to some
kind of an untimely end. No! there was no alternative, he must remain
and trust in Mlle de Nurrez. But the house was appalling; he did not
like looking at it, and the bare thought of its interior froze his
blood. Then he awoke to the fact that she was still addressing him, that
her soft hands were lying on his, that her beautiful eyes were gazing
entreatingly at him, that her full ripe lips were within a few inches of
his own. The moon lent her its glamour, and his old love reasserting
itself with quick, tempestuous force, he drew her into his arms and
kissed her repeatedly. Some minutes later and they had crossed the
threshold of the mansion. All was as he had pictured it--grim and
hushed, and bathed in moonbeams.

The coachman led the way, and with muffled, stealthy footstep conducted
them across dark halls and along intricate passages, up long and winding
staircases--all bare and cold; through vast gloomy rooms, the walls and
floors of which were of black oak, the former richly carved, and in
places hung with ancient tapestry, displaying the most grotesque and
startling devices. The windows, long, narrow, and pointed, with
trellised panes, were at so great a height from the ground that the
light was limited, and whilst certain spots were illuminated, many of
the remoter angles and recesses were left in total darkness. Monsieur
Paul Nicholas did not attempt to explore. At each step he took he fully
anticipated a something, too dreadful to imagine, would spring out on
him. The rustling of drapery and the rattling of phantasmagoric armorial
trophies, in response to the vibration of their footsteps, made his hair
stand on end, and he was reduced to a state of the most abject terror
long before they arrived at their destination.

At last he was ushered into a small, bare, dimly lighted room. From the
centre of the ceiling was suspended an oil lamp, and immediately under
it was a marble table. Walls and floor were composed of rough uncovered
granite. The atmosphere was fetid, and tainted with the same peculiar,
pungent odour noticeable outside.

"This is the room," Mlle de Nurrez said. "Prince Dajarah will be here in
a minute. Have you your pistol ready?"

"Yes, see!" and Paul Nicholas pulled it out from his coat-pocket and
showed it her.

"Have you any other weapons?" she asked, examining it curiously.

"Yes, a sheath-knife," Paul Nicholas replied a trifle nervously.

"Let me look at it," Mlle de Nurrez exclaimed. "I have a weakness for
knives--a rather uncommon trait in a woman, isn't it?"

He handed it to her, and she fingered the blade cautiously. Then with a
sudden movement she leaped away from him.

"Fool!" she cried. "Do you think I could ever love a man as fat as you?
The story I told you was a lie from beginning to end. I don't remember
either of my parents--my mother ran away from home when I was two, and
my father died the following year. I married entirely of my own free
will--married the man I loved, and he--happened to be a werwolf!"

"A werwolf!" Paul Nicholas shrieked. "God help me! I thought there were
no such things!"

"Not in France, perhaps," Mlle de Nurrez said derisively; "but in Spain,
in the Pyrenees, many! At certain times of the year my husband won't
touch animal food, and if I didn't procure him human flesh he would die
of starvation, or in sheer despair eat me. Here he is."

And as she spoke the door opened, and on the threshold stood a
singularly handsome young man clad in the gay uniform of a Carlist
general.

"Capital!" he exclaimed, as his eyes fell on Paul. "Magnificent! He is
quite as fat as the other two. How clever of you, darling!" and throwing
his arms round her, he embraced her tenderly. A few seconds later and he
suddenly thrust her from him.

"Quick! quick!" he cried. "Run away, darling! run away instantly. I can
feel myself changing!" and he pushed her gently to the door.

Mlle de Nurrez took one glance at Paul as she left the room. "Poor
fool!" she said, half pityingly, half mockingly. "Poor fat fool! Though
you may no longer believe in women you will certainly believe in
werwolves--now." And as the door slammed after her, the wildest of
shrieks from within demonstrated that, for once in her life, Mlle de
Nurrez had spoken the truth.



