FAIRIES OR NO FAIRIES.

VIII.


John Mulligan was as fine an old fellow as ever threw a Carlow spur
into the sides of a horse. He was, besides, as jolly a boon companion
over a jug of punch as you would meet from Carnsore Point to Bloody
Farland. And a good horse he used to ride; and a stiffer jug of punch
than his was not in nineteen baronies. May be he stuck more to it than
he ought to have done—but that is nothing whatever to the story I am
going to tell.

John believed devoutly in fairies; and an angry man was he if you
doubted them. He had more fairy stories than would make, if properly
printed in a rivulet of print running down a meadow of margin, two
thick quartos for Mr. Murray, of Albemarle street; all of which he
used to tell on all occasions that he could find listeners. Many
believed his stories—many more did not believe them—but nobody, in
process of time, used to contradict the old gentleman, for it was a
pity to vex him. But he had a couple of young neighbours who were just
come down from their first vacation in Trinity College to spend the
summer months with an uncle of theirs, Mr. Whaley, an old Cromwellian,
who lived at Ballybegmullinahone, and they were too full of logic to
let the old man have his own way undisputed.

Every story he told they laughed at, and said that it was
impossible—that it was merely old woman’s gabble, and other such
things. When he would insist that all his stories were derived from
the most credible sources—nay, that some of them had been told him by
his own grandmother, a very respectable old lady, but slightly
affected in her faculties, as things that came under her own
knowledge—they cut the matter short by declaring that she was in her
dotage, and at the best of times had a strong propensity to pulling a
long bow.

“But,” said they, “Jack Mulligan did you ever see a fairy yourself?”

“Never,” was the reply.—“Never, as I am a man of honour and credit.”

“Well, then,” they answered, “until you do, do not be bothering us
with any more tales of my grandmother.”

Jack was particularly nettled at this, and took up the cudgels for his
grandmother; but the younkers were too sharp for him, and finally he
got into a passion, as people generally do who have the worst of an
argument. This evening it was at their uncle’s, an old crony of his,
with whom he had dined—he had taken a large portion of his usual
beverage, and was quite riotous. He at last got up in a passion,
ordered his horse, and, in spite of his host’s entreaties, galloped
off, although he had intended to have slept there; declaring that he
would not have any thing more to do with a pair of jackanapes puppies,
who, because they had learned how to read good-for-nothing books in
cramp writing, and were taught by a parcel of wiggy, red-snouted,
prating prigs, (“not,” added he, “however, that I say a man may not be
a good man and have a red nose,”) they imagined they knew more than a
man who had held buckle and tongue together facing the wind of the
world for five dozen years.

He rode off in a fret, and galloped as hard as his horse Shaunbuie
could powder away over the limestone. “Yes, indeed!” muttered he, “the
brats had me in one thing—I never did see a fairy; and I would give
up five as good acres as ever grew apple-potatoes to get a glimpse of
one—and by the powers! what is that?”

He looked, and saw a gallant spectacle. His road lay by a noble
demesne, gracefully sprinkled with trees, not thickly planted as in a
dark forest, but disposed, now in clumps of five or six, now standing
singly, towering over the plain of verdure around them as a beautiful
promontory arising out of the sea. He had come right opposite the
glory of the wood. It was an oak, which in the oldest title-deeds of
the county, and they were at least five hundred years old, was called
the old oak of Ballinghassig. Age had hollowed its centre, but its
massy boughs still waved with their dark serrated foliage. The moon
was shining on it bright. If I were a poet, like Mr. Wordsworth, I
should tell you how the beautiful light was broken into a thousand
different fragments—and how it filled the entire tree with a glorious
flood, bathing every particular leaf, and showing forth every
particular bough; but, as I am not a poet, I shall go on with my
story. By this light Jack saw a brilliant company of lovely little
forms dancing under the oak with an unsteady and rolling motion. The
company was large. Some spread out far beyond the farthest boundary of
the shadow of the oak’s branches—some were seen glancing through the
flashes of light shining through its leaves—some were barely visible,
nestling under the trunk—some, no doubt, were entirely concealed from
his eyes. Never did man see any thing more beautiful. They were not
three inches in height, but they were white as the driven snow, and
beyond number numberless. Jack threw the bridle over his horse’s neck,
and drew up to the low wall which bounded the demesne, and leaning
over it, surveyed with infinite delight, their diversified gambols. By
looking long at them, he soon saw objects which had not struck him at
first; in particular that in the middle was a chief of superior
stature, round whom the group appeared to move. He gazed so long that
he was quite overcome with joy, and could not help shouting out:
“Bravo! little fellow,” said he, “well kicked and strong.” But the
instant he uttered the words the night was darkened, and the fairies
vanished with the speed of lightning.

“I wish,” said Jack, “I had held my tongue; but no matter now. I shall
just turn bridle about and go back to Ballybegmullinahone Castle, and
beat the young Master Whaleys, fine reasoners as they think
themselves, out of the field clean.”

No sooner said than done: and Jack was back again as if upon the wings
of the wind. He rapped fiercely at the door, and called aloud for the
two collegians.

“Halloo!” said he, “young Flatcaps, come down, if you dare. Come down,
if you dare, and I shall give you _oc-oc-_ocular demonstration of the
truth of what I was saying.”

Old Whaley put his head out of the window, and said, “Jack Mulligan,
what brings you back so soon?”

“The fairies,” shouted Jack; “the fairies!”

“I am afraid,” muttered the Lord of Ballybegmullinahone, “the last
glass you took was too little watered; but, no matter—come in and
cool yourself over a tumbler of punch.”

He came in and sat down again at table. In great spirits he told his
story;—how he had seen thousands and tens of thousands of fairies
dancing about the old oak of Ballinghassig; he described their
beautiful dresses of shining silver; their flat-crowned hats,
glittering in the moonbeams; and the princely stature and demeanour of
the central figure. He added, that he heard them singing and playing
the most enchanting music; but this was merely imagination. The young
men laughed, but Jack held his ground. “Suppose,” said one of the
lads, “we join company with you on the road, and ride along to the
place, where you saw that fine company of fairies?”

“Done!” cried Jack; “but I will not promise that you will find them
there, for I saw them scudding up in the sky like a flight of bees,
and heard their wings whizzing through the air.” This, you know, was a
bounce, for Jack had heard no such thing.

Off rode the three, and came to the demesne of Oakwood. They arrived
at the wall flanking the field where stood the great oak; and the
moon, by this time, having again emerged from the clouds, shone bright
as when Jack had passed. “Look there,” he cried, exultingly: for the
same spectacle again caught his eyes, and he pointed to it with his
horsewhip; “look, and deny if you can.”

“Why,” said one of the lads, pausing, “true it is that we do see a
company of white creatures; but were they fairies ten times over, I
shall go among them;” and he dismounted to climb over the wall.

“Ah, Tom! Tom,” cried Jack, “stop, man, stop! what are you doing? The
fairies—the good people, I mean—hate to be meddled with. You will be
pinched or blinded; or your horse will cast its shoe; or—look! a
wilful man will have his way. Oh! oh! he is almost at the oak—God
help him! for he is past the help of man.”

By this time Tom was under the tree, and burst out laughing. “Jack,”
said he, “keep your prayers to yourself. Your fairies are not bad at
all. I believe they will make tolerably good catsup.”

“Catsup,” said Jack, who, when he found that the two lads (for the
second had followed his brother) were both laughing in the middle of
the fairies, had dismounted and advanced slowly—“What do you mean by
catsup?”

“Nothing,” replied Tom, “but that they are mushrooms (as indeed they
were:) and your Oberon is merely this overgrown puff-ball.”

Poor Mulligan gave a long whistle of amazement, staggered back to his
horse without saying a word, and rode home in a hard gallop, never
looking behind him. Many a long day was it before he ventured to face
the laughers at Ballybegmullinahone; and to the day of his death the
people of the parish, ay, and five parishes round called him nothing
but musharoon Jack, such being their pronunciation of mushroom.

I should be sorry if all my fairy stories ended with so little
dignity: but—

              “These our actors,
    As I foretold you, were all spirits, and
    Are melted into air—into thin air.”

     The name SHEFRO, by which the foregoing section is
     distinguished, literally signifies a fairy house or mansion,
     and is adopted as a general name for the Elves who are supposed
     to live in troops or communities, and were popularly supposed
     to have castles or mansions of their own.—See _Stewart’s
     Popular Superstitions of the Highlands_, 1823, pp. 90, 91, &c.

     _Sia_, _sigh_, _sighe_, _sigheann_, _siabhra_, _siachaire_,
     _siogidh_, are Irish words, evidently springing from a common
     Celtic root, used to express a fairy or goblin, and even a hag
     or witch. Thus we have the compounds _Leannan-sighe_, a
     familiar, from _Leannan_, a pet, and _Sioghdhraoidheachd_,
     enchantment with or by spirits.

     _Sigh gàoithe_ or _siaheann-gàoithe_, a whirlwind, is so termed
     because it is said to be raised by the fairies. The close of
     day called _Sia_, because twilight,

        “That sweet hour, when day is almost closing,”

     is the time when the fairies are most frequently seen. Again,
     _Sigh_ is a hill or hillock, because the fairies are believed
     to dwell within. _Sidhe_, _sidheadh_, and _sigh_, are names for
     a blast or blight, because it is supposed to proceed from the
     fairies.

     The term _Shoges_, i.e. _Sigh oges_ (young or little spirits,)
     Fairies, is used in a curious poem printed under the name of
     “The Irish Hudibras,” 1689, pp. 23, and 81; a copy of which,
     entitled “The Fingallian Travesty,” is among the Sloane MSS.
     No. 900. In the Third Part of O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, it is
     related that St. Patrick and some of his followers, who were
     chanting matins beside a fountain, were taken for “_Sidhe_, or
     fairies,” by some pagan ladies.

     “The Irish,” according to the Rev. James Hely’s translation of
     O’Flaherty, “call these _Sidhe_, aërial spirits or phantoms,
     because they are seen to come out of pleasant hills, where the
     common people imagine they reside, which fictitious habitations
     are called by us _Sidhe_ or _Siodha_.”

     For a similar extended use of the German word _Alp_, _Elf_, &c.
     see Introductory Essay to the Grimms’ _Irische Elfenmärchen_,
     pp. 55–62.



