LEGENDS OF THE SHEFRO.




THE LEGEND OF KNOCKSHEOGOWNA.

I.


In Tipperary is one of the most singularly shaped hills in the world.
It has got a peak at the top like a conical nightcap thrown carelessly
over your head as you awake in the morning. On the very point is built
a sort of lodge, where in the summer the lady who built it and her
friends used to go on parties of pleasure; but that was long after the
days of the fairies, and it is, I believe, now deserted.

But before lodge was built, or acre sown, there was close to the head
of this hill a large pasturage, where a herdsman spent his days and
nights among the herd. The spot had been an old fairy ground, and the
good people were angry that the scene of their light and airy gambols
should be trampled by the rude hoofs of bulls and cows. The lowing of
the cattle sounded sad in their ears, and the chief of the fairies of
the hill determined in person to drive away the new comers; and the
way she thought of was this. When the harvest nights came on, and the
moon shone bright and brilliant over the hill, and the cattle were
lying down hushed and quiet, and the herdsman, wrapt in his mantle,
was musing with his heart gladdened by the glorious company of the
stars twinkling above him, she would come and dance before him,—now
in one shape—now in another,—but all ugly and frightful to behold.
One time she would be a great horse, with the wings of an eagle, and a
tail like a dragon, hissing loud and spitting fire. Then in a moment
she would change into a little man lame of a leg, with a bull’s head,
and a lambent flame playing round it. Then into a great ape, with
duck’s feet, and a turkey cock’s tail. But I should be all day about
it were I to tell you all the shapes she took. And then she would
roar, or neigh, or hiss, or bellow, or howl, or hoot, as never yet was
roaring, neighing, hissing, bellowing, howling, or hooting, heard in
this world before or since. The poor herdsman would cover his face,
and call on all the saints for help, but it was no use. With one puff
of her breath she would blow away the fold of his great coat, let him
hold it never so tightly over his eyes, and not a saint in heaven paid
him the slightest attention. And to make matters worse, he never could
stir; no, nor even shut his eyes, but there was obliged to stay, held
by what power he knew not, gazing at these terrible sights until the
hair of his head would lift his hat half a foot over his crown, and
his teeth would be ready to fall out from chattering. But the cattle
would scamper about mad, as if they were bitten by the fly; and this
would last until the sun rose over the hill.

The poor cattle from want of rest were pining away, and food did them
no good; besides, they met with accidents without end. Never a night
passed that some of them did not fall into a pit, and get maimed, or,
may be, killed. Some would tumble into a river and be drowned; in a
word, there seemed never to be an end of the accidents. But what made
the matter worse, there could not be a herdsman got to tend the cattle
by night. One visit from the fairy drove the stoutest hearted almost
mad. The owner of the ground did not know what to do. He offered
double, treble, quadruple wages, but not a man could be found for the
sake of money to go through the horror of facing the fairy. She
rejoiced at the successful issue of her project, and continued her
pranks. The herd gradually thinning, and no man daring to remain on
the ground, the fairies came back in numbers, and gambolled as merrily
as before, quaffing dew-drops from acorns, and spreading their feast
on the heads of capacious mushrooms.

What was to be done? the puzzled farmer thought in vain. He found that
his substance was daily diminishing, his people terrified, and his
rent-day coming round. It is no wonder that he looked gloomy, and
walked mournfully down the road. Now in that part of the world dwelt
a man of the name of Larry Hoolahan, who played on the pipes better
than any other player within fifteen parishes. A roving, dashing blade
was Larry, and feared nothing. Give him plenty of liquor, and he would
defy the devil. He would face a mad bull, or fight single-handed
against a fair. In one of his gloomy walks the farmer met him, and on
Larry’s asking the cause of his down looks, he told him all his
misfortunes. “If that is all ails you,” said Larry, “make your mind
easy. Were there as many fairies on Knocksheogowna as there are potato
blossoms in Eliogurty, I would face them. It would be a queer thing,
indeed, if I, who never was afraid of a proper man, should turn my
back upon a brat of a fairy not the bigness of one’s thumb.” “Larry,”
said the farmer, “do not talk so bold, for you know not who is hearing
you; but if you make your words good, and watch my herds for a week on
the top of the mountain, your hand shall be free of my dish till the
sun has burnt itself down to the bigness of a farthing rushlight.”

The bargain was struck, and Larry went to the hill-top, when the moon
began to peep over the brow. He had been regaled at the farmer’s
house, and was bold with the extract of barley-corn. So he took his
seat on a big stone under a hollow of the hill, with his back to the
wind, and pulled out his pipes. He had not played long when the voice
of the fairies was heard upon the blast, like a slow stream of music.
Presently they burst out into a loud laugh, and Larry could plainly
hear one say, “What! another man upon the fairies’ ring? Go to him,
queen, and make him repent his rashness;” and they flew away. Larry
felt them pass by his face as they flew, like a swarm of midges; and,
looking up hastily, he saw between the moon and him a great black cat,
standing on the very tip of its claws, with its back up, and mewing
with the voice of a water-mill. Presently it swelled up towards the
sky, and turning round on its left hind-leg, whirled till it fell to
the ground, from which it started up in the shape of a salmon, with a
cravat round its neck, and a pair of new topboots. “Go on, jewel,”
said Larry; “if you dance, I’ll pipe;” and he struck up. So she turned
into this, and that, and the other, but still Larry played on, as he
well knew how. At last she lost patience, as ladies will do when you
do not mind their scolding, and changed herself into a calf,
milk-white as the cream of Cork, and with eyes as mild as those of the
girl I love. She came up gentle and fawning, in hopes to throw him off
his guard by quietness, and then to work him some wrong. But Larry was
not so deceived; for when she came up, he, dropping his pipes, leaped
upon her back.

Now from the top of Knocksheogowna, as you look westward to the broad
Atlantic, you will see the Shannon, queen of rivers; “spreading like a
sea,” and running on in gentle course to mingle with the ocean through
the fair city of Limerick. It on this night shone under the moon, and
looked beautiful from the distant hill. Fifty boats were gliding up
and down on the sweet current, and the song of the fishermen rose
gaily from the shore. Larry, as I said before, leaped upon the back of
the fairy, and she, rejoiced at the opportunity, sprung from the
hill-top, and bounded clear, at one jump, over the Shannon, flowing as
it was just ten miles from the mountain’s base. It was done in a
second, and when she alighted on the distant bank, kicking up her
heels, she flung Larry on the soft turf. No sooner was he thus
planted, than he looked her straight in the face, and scratching his
head, cried out, “By my word, well done! that was not a bad leap _for
a calf_!”

She looked at him for a moment, and then assumed her own shape.
“Laurence,” said she, “you are a bold fellow; will you come back the
way you went?” “And that’s what I will,” said he, “if you let me.” So
changing to a calf again, again Larry got on her back, and at another
bound they were again upon the top of Knocksheogowna. The fairy, once
more resuming her figure, addressed him: “You have shown so much
courage, Laurence,” said she, “that while you keep herds on this hill
you never shall be molested by me or mine. The day dawns, go down to
the farmer, and tell him this; and if any thing I can do may be of
service to you, ask, and you shall have it.” She vanished accordingly;
and kept her word in never visiting the hill during Larry’s life: but
he never troubled her with requests. He piped and drank at the
farmer’s expense, and roosted in his chimney corner, occasionally
casting an eye to the flock. He died at last, and is buried in a green
valley of pleasant Tipperary: but whether the fairies returned to the
hill of Knocksheogowna[1] after his death, is more than I can say.

    [1] Knocksheogowna signifies “_The Hill of the Fairy Calf._”




THE LEGEND OF KNOCKFIERNA.[2]

II.


    [2] “Called by the people of the country ‘_Knock Dhoinn
    Firinne_,’ the mountain of Donn of Truth. This mountain is very
    high, and may be seen for several miles round; and when people
    are desirous to know whether or not any day will rain, they look
    at the top of Knock Firinne, and if they see a vapour or mist
    there, they immediately conclude that rain will soon follow,
    believing that Donn (the lord or chief) of that mountain and his
    aërial assistants are collecting the clouds, and that he holds
    them there for some short time, to warn the people of the
    approaching rain. As the appearance of mist on that mountain in
    the morning is considered an infallible sign that that day will
    be rainy, Donn is called ‘_Donn Firinne_,’ Donn of Truth.”—MR.
    EDWARD O’REILLY.

It is a very good thing not to be any way in dread of the fairies, for
without doubt they have then less power over a person; but to make too
free with them, or to disbelieve in them altogether, is as foolish a
thing as man, woman, or child can do.

It has been truly said, that “good manners are no burden,” and that
“civility costs nothing;” but there are some people fool-hardy enough
to disregard doing a civil thing, which, whatever they may think, can
never harm themselves or any one else, and who at the same time will
go out of their way for a bit of mischief, which never can serve them;
but sooner or later they will come to know better, as you shall hear
of Carroll O’Daly, a strapping young fellow up out of Connaught, whom
they used to call, in his own country, “Devil Daly.”

Carroll O’Daly used to go roving about from one place to another, and
the fear of nothing stopped him; he would as soon pass an old
churchyard or a regular fairy ground, at any hour of the night as go
from one room into another, without ever making the sign of the cross,
or saying, “Good luck attend you, gentlemen.”

It so happened that he was once journeying, in the county of Limerick,
towards “the Balbec of Ireland,” the venerable town of Kilmallock; and
just at the foot of Knockfierna he overtook a respectable-looking man
jogging along upon a white pony. The night was coming on, and they
rode side by side for some time, without much conversation passing
between them, further than saluting each other very kindly; at last,
Carroll O’Daly asked his companion how far he was going?

“Not far your way,” said the farmer, for such his appearance bespoke
him; “I’m only going to the top of this hill here.”

“And what might take you there,” said O’Daly, “at this time of the
night?”

“Why then,” replied the farmer, “if you want to know; ’tis the _good
people_.”

“The fairies you mean,” said O’Daly.

“Whist! whist!” said his fellow-traveller, “or you may be sorry for
it;” and he turned his pony off the road they were going, towards a
little path which led up the side of the mountain, wishing Carroll
O’Daly good night and a safe journey.

“That fellow,” thought Carroll, “is about no good this blessed night,
and I would have no fear of swearing wrong if I took my Bible oath
that it is something else beside the fairies, or the good people, as
he calls them, that is taking him up the mountain at this hour. The
fairies!” he repeated, “is it for a well-shaped man like him to be
going after little chaps like the fairies! To be sure some say there
are such things, and more say not; but I know this, that never afraid
would I be of a dozen of them, ay, of two dozen, for that matter, if
they are no bigger than what I hear tell of.”

Carroll O’Daly, whilst these thoughts were passing in his mind, had
fixed his eyes steadfastly on the mountain, behind which the full moon
was rising majestically. Upon an elevated point that appeared darkly
against the moon’s disk, he beheld the figure of a man leading a pony,
and he had no doubt it was that of the farmer with whom he had just
parted company.

A sudden resolve to follow flashed across the mind of O’Daly with the
speed of lightning: both his courage and curiosity had been worked up
by his cogitations to a pitch of chivalry; and, muttering, “Here’s
after you, old boy!” he dismounted from his horse, bound him to an old
thorntree, and then commenced vigorously ascending the mountain.

Following as well as he could the direction taken by the figures of
the man and pony, he pursued his way, occasionally guided by their
partial appearance: and after toiling nearly three hours over a rugged
and sometimes swampy path, came to a green spot on the top of the
mountain, where he saw the white pony at full liberty grazing as
quietly as may be. O’Daly looked around for the rider, but he was
nowhere to be seen; he, however, soon discovered, close to where the
pony stood, an opening in the mountain like the mouth of a pit, and he
remembered having heard, when a child, many a tale about the
“Poul-duve,” or Black Hole of Knockfierna; how it was the entrance to
the fairy castle which was within the mountain; and how a man whose
name was Ahern, a land surveyor in that part of the country, had once
attempted to fathom it with a line, and had been drawn down into it,
and was never again heard of; with many other tales of the like
nature.

“But,” thought O’Daly, “these are old woman’s stories: and since I’ve
come up so far, I’ll just knock at the castle door and see if the
fairies are at home.”

No sooner said than done; for, seizing a large stone, as big, ay,
bigger than his two hands, he flung it with all his strength down
into the Poul-duve of Knockfierna. He heard it bounding and tumbling
about from one rock to another with a terrible noise, and he leaned
his head over to try and hear when it would reach the bottom,—and
what should the very stone he had thrown in do but come up again with
as much force as it had gone down, and gave him such a blow full in
the face, that it sent him rolling down the side of Knockfierna, head
over heels, tumbling from one crag to another, much faster than he
came up. And in the morning Carroll O’Daly was found lying beside his
horse; the bridge of his nose broken, which disfigured him for life;
his head all cut and bruised, and both his eyes closed up, and as
black as if Sir Daniel Donnelly had painted them for him.

Carroll O’Daly was never bold again in riding along near the haunts of
the fairies after dusk; but small blame to him for that; and if ever
he happened to be benighted in a lonesome place, he would make the
best of his way to his journey’s end, without asking questions, or
turning to the right or to the left, to seek after the good people, or
any who kept company with them.



