THE LITTLE SHOE.

XI.


“Now tell me, Molly,” said Mr. Coote to Molly Cogan, as he met her on
the road one day, close to one of the old gateways of Kilmallock,[14]
“did you ever hear of the Cluricaune?”

    [14] “Kilmallock seemed to me like the court of the Queen of
    Silence.”—_O’Keefe’s Recollections._

“Is it the Cluricaune? why, then, sure I did, often and often; many’s
the time I heard my father, rest his soul! tell about ’em.”

“But did you ever see one, Molly, yourself?”

“Och! no, I never _see_ one in my life; but my grandfather, that’s my
father’s father, you know, he _see_ one, one time, and caught him
too.”

“Caught him! Oh! Molly, tell me how?”

“Why, then, I’ll tell you. My grandfather, you see, was out there
above in the bog, drawing home turf, and the poor old mare was tired
after her day’s work, and the old man went out to the stable to look
after her, and to see if she was eating her hay; and when he came to
the stable door there, my dear, he heard something hammering,
hammering, hammering, just for all the world like a shoemaker making a
shoe, and whistling all the time the prettiest tune he ever heard in
his whole life before. Well, my grandfather, he thought it was the
Cluricaune, and he said to himself, says he, ‘I’ll catch you, if I
can, and then, I’ll have money enough always.’ So he opened the door
very quietly, and didn’t make a bit of noise in the world that ever
was heard; and looked all about, but the never a bit of the little man
he could see anywhere, but he heard him hammering and whistling, and
so he looked and looked, till at last he _see_ the little fellow; and
where was he, do you think, but in the girth under the mare; and there
he was with his little bit of an apron on him, and hammer in his
hand, and a little red nightcap on his head, and he making a shoe; and
he was so busy with his work, and he was hammering and whistling so
loud, that he never minded my grandfather till he caught him fast in
his hand. ‘Faith I have you now,’ says he, ‘and I’ll never let you go
till I get your purse—that’s what I won’t; so give it here to me at
once, now.’—‘Stop, stop,’ says the Cluricaune, ‘stop, stop,’ says he,
’till I get it for you.’ So my grandfather, like a fool, you see,
opened his hand a little, and the little fellow jumped away laughing,
and he never saw him any more, and the never the bit of the purse did
he get, only the Cluricaune left his little shoe that he was making;
and my grandfather was mad enough angry with himself for letting him
go; but he had the shoe all his life, and my own mother told me she
often _see_ it, and had it in her hand, and ’twas the prettiest little
shoe she ever saw.”

“And did you see it yourself, Molly?”

“Oh! no, my dear, it was lost long afore I was born; but my mother
told me about it often and often enough.”

     The main point of distinction between the Cluricaune and the
     Shefro, arises from the sottish and solitary habits of the
     former, who are rarely found in troops or communities.

     The Cluricaune of the county of Cork, the Luricaune of Kerry,
     and the Lurigadaune of Tipperary, appear to be the same as the
     Leprechan or Leprochaune of Leinster, and the Logherry-man of
     Ulster; and these words are probably all provincialisms of the
     Irish for a pigmy.

     It is possible, and is in some measure borne out by the text of
     one of the preceding stories [IX.], that the word _luacharman_
     is merely an Anglo-Irish induction, compounded of (a rush,) and
     the English word, _man_.—A rushy man,—that may be, a man of
     the height of a rush, or a being who dwelt among rushes, that
     is, unfrequented or boggy places.

     The following dialogue is said to have taken place in an Irish
     court of justice, upon the witness having used the word
     Leprochaune:—

     _Court._—Pray what is a leprochaune? the law knows no such
     character or designation.

     _Witness._—My lord, it is a little counsellor man in the
     fairies, or an attorney that robs them all, and he always
     carries a purse that is full of money, and if you see him and
     keep your eyes on him, and that you never turn them aside, he
     cannot get away, and if you catch him he gives you the purse to
     let him go, and then you’re as rich as a Jew.

     _Court._—Did you ever know of any one that caught a
     Leprochaune? I wish I could catch one.

     _Witness._—Yes, my lord, there was one—

     _Court._—That will do.

     With respect to “money matters,” there appears to be a strong
     resemblance between the ancient Roman Incubus and the Irish
     Cluricaune.—“Sed quomodo dicunt, ego nihil scio, sed audivi,
     quomodo incuboni pileum rapuisset et thesaurum invenit,” are
     the words of Petronius.—See, for farther arguments in support
     of identity of the two spirits, the Brothers Grimm’s Essay on
     the Nature of the Elves, prefixed to their translation of this
     work, under the head of “Ancient Testimonies.”

     “Old German and Northern poems contain numerous accounts of the
     skill of the dwarfs in curious smith’s-work.”—“The Irish
     Cluricaune is heard hammering; he is particularly fond of
     making shoes, but these were in ancient times made of metal (in
     the old Northern language a shoemaker is called a
     _shoe-smith_;) and, singularly enough, the wights in a German
     tradition manifest the same propensity; for, whatever work the
     shoemaker has been able to cut out in the day, they finish
     with incredible quickness during the night.”