CLOUGH NA CUDDY.

XXXIX.


Above all the islands in the lakes of Killarney give me
Innisfallen—“sweet Innisfallen,” as the melodious Moore calls it. It
is, in truth, a fairy isle, although I have no fairy story to tell you
about it; and if I had, these are such unbelieving times, and people
of late have grown so skeptical, that they only smile at my stories,
and doubt them.

However, none will doubt that a monastery once stood upon Innisfallen
island, for its ruins may still be seen; neither, that within its
walls dwelt certain pious and learned persons called Monks. A very
pleasant set of fellows they were, I make not the smallest doubt; and
I am sure of this, that they had a very pleasant spot to enjoy
themselves in after dinner—the proper time, believe me, and I am no
bad judge of such matters, for the enjoyment of a fine prospect.

Out of all the monks you could not pick a better fellow nor a merrier
soul than Father Cuddy; he sung a good song, he told a good story, and
had a jolly, comfortable-looking paunch of his own, that was a credit
to any refectory table. He was distinguished above all the rest by the
name of “the fat father.” Now there are many that will take huff at a
name; but Father Cuddy had no nonsense of that kind about him; he
laughed at it—and well able he was to laugh, for his mouth nearly
reached from one ear to the other: his might, in truth, be called an
open countenance. As his paunch was no disgrace to his food, neither
was his nose to his drink. ’Tis a doubt to me if there were not more
carbuncles upon it than ever were seen at the bottom of the lake,
which is said to be full of them. His eyes had a right merry twinkle
in them, like moonshine dancing on the water; and his cheeks had the
roundness and crimson glow of ripe arbutus berries.

    “He ate, and drank, and prayed, and slept.—What then?
    He ate, and drank, and prayed, and slept again!”

Such was the tenor of his simple life: but when he prayed a certain
drowsiness would come upon him, which, it must be confessed, never
occurred when a well-filled “blackjack” stood before him. Hence his
prayers were short and his draughts were long. The world loved him,
and he saw no good reason why he should not in return love its venison
and usquebaugh. But, as times went, he must have been a pious man, or
else what befell him never would have happened.

Spiritual affairs—for it was respecting the importation of a tun of
wine into the island monastery—demanded the presence of one of the
brotherhood of Innisfallen at the abbey of Irelagh, now called
Mucruss. The superintendence of this important matter was committed to
Father Cuddy, who felt too deeply interested in the future welfare of
any community of which he was a member, to neglect or delay such
mission. With the morning’s light he was seen guiding his shallop
across the crimson waters of the lake towards the peninsula of
Mucruss; and having moored his little bark in safety beneath the
shelter of a wave-worn rock, he advanced with becoming dignity towards
the abbey.

The stillness of the bright and balmy hour was broken by the heavy
footsteps of the zealous father. At the sound the startled deer,
shaking the dew from their sides, sprung up from their lair, and as
they bounded off—“Hah!” exclaimed Cuddy, “what a noble haunch goes
there!—how delicious it would look smoking upon a goodly platter!”

As he proceeded, the mountain-bee hummed his tune of gladness around
the holy man, save when he buried in the foxglove bell, or revelling
upon a fragrant bunch of thyme; and even then the little voice
murmured out happiness in low and broken tones of voluptuous delight.
Father Cuddy derived no small comfort from the sound, for it presaged
a good metheglin season, and metheglin he regarded, if well
manufactured, to be no bad liquor, particularly when there was no
stint of usquebaugh in the brewing.

Arrived within the abbey garth, he was received with due respect by
the brethren of Irelagh, and arrangements for the embarkation of the
wine were completed to his entire satisfaction. “Welcome, Father
Cuddy,” said the prior: “grace be on you.”

“Grace before meat, then,” said Cuddy, “for a long walk always makes
me hungry, and I am certain I have not walked less than half a mile
this morning, to say nothing of crossing the water.”

A pasty of choice flavour felt the truth of this assertion, as
regarded Father Cuddy’s appetite. After such consoling repast, it
would have been a reflection on monastic hospitality to depart without
partaking of the grace-cup; moreover, Father Cuddy had a particular
respect for the antiquity of that custom. He liked the taste of the
grace-cup well:—he tried another,—it was no less excellent; and when
he had swallowed the third he found his heart expand, and put forth
its fibres, willing to embrace all mankind. Surely, then, there is
Christian love and charity in wine!

I said he sung a good song. Now though psalms are good songs, and in
accordance with his vocation, I did not mean to imply that he was a
mere psalm-singer. It was well known to the brethren, that wherever
Father Cuddy was, mirth and melody were with him; mirth in his eye and
melody on his tongue; and these, from experience, are equally well
known to be thirsty commodities; but he took good care never to let
them run dry. To please the brotherhood, whose excellent wine pleased
him, he sung, and as “_in vino veritas_” his song will well become
this veritable history.
