THE FRIAR’S SONG.

    I.

            My vows I can never fulfil,
                      Until
        I have breakfasted, one way or other;
              And I freely protest,
              That I never can rest
              ‘Till I borrow or beg
                    An egg,
    Unless I can come at the ould hen, its mother.
              But Maggy, my dear,
              While you’re here,
                  I don’t fear
    To want eggs that have just been laid newly;
              For och! you’re a pearl
                Of a girl,
      And you’re called so in _Latin_ most truly.

    II.

        Me hora jucunda cœnæ
        Dilectat bene,
      Et rerum sine dubio grandium
      Maxima est prandium:
        Sed mihi crede,
        In hâc æde,
    Multo magis gaudeo,
      Cum gallicantum audio,
        In sinu tuo
        Videns ova duo.
      Oh semper me tractes ita!
        Panibus de hordeo factis,
        Et copiâ lactis,
      Candida Margarita!

    III.

    There is most to my mind something that is still upper
                        Than supper,
    Though it must be admitted I feel no way thinner
                        After dinner:
    But soon as I hear the cock crow
                        In the morning,
    That eggs you are bringing full surely I know,
                      By that warning,
    While your buttermilk helps me to float
                        Down my throat
          Those sweet cakes made of oat.
                        I don’t envy an earl,
                        Sweet girl,
    Och, ’tis you are a beautiful pearl.

Such was his song. Father Cuddy smacked his lips at the recollection
of Margery’s delicious fried eggs, which always imparted a peculiar
relish to his liquor. The very idea provoked Cuddy to raise the cup to
his mouth, and with one hearty pull thereat he finished its contents.

This is, and ever was a censorious world, often construing what is
only a fair allowance into an excess: but I scorn to reckon up any
man’s drink, like an unrelenting host; therefore, I cannot tell how
many brimming draughts of wine, bedecked with _the venerable Bead_,
Father Cuddy emptied into his “soul-case,” so he figuratively termed
the body.

His respect for the goodly company of the monks of Irelagh detained
him until their adjournment to vespers, when he set forward on his
return to Innisfallen. Whether his mind was occupied in philosophic
contemplation or wrapped in pious musings, I cannot declare, but the
honest father wandered on in a different direction from that in which
his shallop lay. Far be it from me to insinuate that the good liquor,
which he had so commended caused him to forget his road, or that his
track was irregular and unsteady. Oh no!—he carried his drink
bravely, as became a decent man and a good Christian; yet somehow, he
thought he could distinguish two moons. “Bless my eyes,” said Father
Cuddy, “every thing is changing now-a-days!—the very stars are not in
the same places they used to be; I think _Camceachta_ (the Plough) is
driving on at a rate I never saw it before to-night; but I suppose the
driver is drunk, for there are blackguards every where.”

Cuddy had scarcely uttered these words, when he saw, or fancied he
saw, the form of a young woman, who, holding up a bottle, beckoned him
towards her. The night was extremely beautiful, and the white dress of
the girl floated gracefully in the moonlight, as with gay step she
tripped on before the worthy father, archly looking back upon him over
her shoulder.

“Ah, Margery, merry Margery!” cried Cuddy, “you tempting little rogue!

    ‘Flos vallium harum,
    Decus puellarum,
    Candida Margarita.’

“I see you, I see you and the bottle! let me but catch you, Candida
Margarita!” and on he followed, panting and smiling, after this
alluring apparition.

At length his feet grew weary, and his breath failed, which obliged
him to give up the chase; yet such was his piety, that unwilling to
rest in any attitude but that of prayer, down dropped Father Cuddy on
his knees. Sleep, as usual, stole upon his devotions; and the morning
was far advanced, when he awoke from dreams, in which tables groaned
beneath their load of viands, and wine poured itself free and
sparkling as the mountain spring.

Rubbing his eyes, he looked about him, and the more he looked the more
he wondered at the alteration which appeared in the face of the
country. “Bless my soul and body!” said the good father, “I saw the
stars changing last night, but here is a change!” Doubting his senses,
he looked again. The hills bore the same majestic outline as on the
preceding day, and the lake spread itself beneath his view in the same
tranquil beauty, and studded with the same number of islands; but
every smaller feature in the landscape was strangely altered. What had
been naked rocks were now clothed with holly and arbutus. Whole woods
had disappeared, and waste places had become cultivated fields; and,
to complete the work of enchantment, the very season itself seemed
changed. In the rosy dawn of a summer’s morning he had left the
monastery of Innisfallen, and he now felt in every sight and sound the
dreariness of winter. The hard ground was covered with withered
leaves; icicles depended from leafless branches; he heard the sweet
low note of the robin, who familiarly approached him; and he felt his
fingers numbed from the nipping frost. Father Cuddy found it rather
difficult to account for such sudden transformations, and to convince
himself it was not the illusion of a dream, he was about to rise, when
lo! he discovered that both his knees were buried at least six inches
in the solid stone; for, notwithstanding all these changes, he had
never altered his devout position.

Cuddy was now wide awake, and felt, when he got up, his joints sadly
cramped, which it was only natural they should be, considering the
hard texture of the stone, and the depth his knees had sunk into it.
But the great difficulty was to explain how, in one night, summer had
become winter, whole woods had been cut down, and well-grown trees had
sprouted up. The miracle, nothing else could he conclude it to be,
urged him to hasten his return to Innisfallen, where he might learn
some explanation of these marvellous events.

Seeing a boat moored within reach of the shore, he delayed not, in the
midst of such wonders, to seek his own bark, but, seizing the oars,
pulled stoutly towards the island; and here new wonders awaited him.

Father Cuddy waddled, as fast as cramped limbs could carry his rotund
corporation, to the gate of the monastery, where he loudly demanded
admittance.

“Holloa! whence come you, master monk, and what’s your business?”
demanded a stranger who occupied the porter’s place.

“Business!—my business!” repeated the confounded Cuddy,—“why, do you
not know me? Has the wine arrived safely?”

“Hence, fellow!” said the porter’s representative, in a surly tone;
“nor think to impose on me with your monkish tales.”

“Fellow!” exclaimed the father: “mercy upon us, that I should be so
spoken to at the gate of my own house!—Scoundrel!” cried Cuddy,
raising his voice, “do you not see my garb—my holy garb?”

“Ay, fellow,” replied he of the keys—“the garb of laziness and filthy
debauchery, which has been expelled from out these walls. Know you
not, idle knave, of the suppression of this nest of superstition, and
that the abbey lands and possessions were granted in August last to
Master Robert Collam, by our Lady Elizabeth, sovereign queen of
England, and paragon of all beauty—whom God preserve!”

“Queen of England!” said Cuddy; “there never was a sovereign queen of
England—this is but a piece with the rest. I saw how it was going
with the stars last night—the world’s turned upside down. But surely
this is Innisfallen island, and I am the Father Cuddy who yesterday
morning went over to the abbey of Irelagh, respecting the tun of wine.
Do you not know me now?”

“Know you!—how should I know you?” said the keeper of the abbey.
“Yet, true it is, that I have heard my grandmother, whose mother
remembered the man, often speak of the fat Father Cuddy of
Innisfallen, who made a profane and godless ballad in praise of fresh
eggs, of which he and his vile crew knew more than they did of the
word of God; and who, being drunk, it is said, tumbled into the lake
one night, and was drowned; but that must have been a hundred, ay,
more than a hundred years since.”

“’Twas I who composed that song in praise of Margery’s fresh eggs,
which is no profane and godless ballad—no other Father Cuddy than
myself ever belonged to Innisfallen,” earnestly exclaimed the holy
man. “A hundred years!—what was your great-grandmother’s name?”

“She was a Mahony of Dunlow—Margaret ni Mahony; and my grandmother—”

“What! merry Margery of Dunlow your great-grandmother!” shouted Cuddy.
“St. Brandon help me!—the wicked wench, with that tempting
bottle!—why, ’twas only last night—a hundred years!—your
great-grandmother, said you?—There has, indeed, been a strange torpor
over me; I must have slept all this time!”

That Father Cuddy had done so, I think is sufficiently proved by the
changes which occurred during his nap. A reformation, and a serious
one it was for him, had taken place. Pretty Margery’s fresh eggs were
no longer to be had in Innisfallen; and with a heart as heavy as his
footsteps, the worthy man directed his course towards Dingle, where he
embarked in a vessel on the point of sailing for Malaga. The rich wine
of that place had of old impressed him with a high respect for its
monastic establishments, in one of which he quietly wore out the
remainder of his days.

The stone impressed with the mark of Father Cuddy’s knees may be seen
to this day. Should any incredulous persons doubt my story, I request
them to go to Killarney, where Clough na Cuddy—so is the stone
called—remains in Lord Kenmare’s park, an indisputable evidence of
the fact. Spillane, the bugle-man, will be able to point it out to
them, as he did so to me; and here is my sketch by which they may
identify it.



