                           PERSIAN ROMANCE.

The pure and simple religion of ancient Persia, originating, it is
said, with a pastoral and hunting race among the lofty hills of
Aderbijân, or, as others think, in the elevated plains of Bactria, in
a region where light appears in all its splendour, took as its
fundamental principle the opposition between light and darkness, and
viewed that opposition as a conflict. Light was happiness; and the
people of Irân, the land of light, were the favourites of Heaven;
while those of Turân, the gloomy region beyond the mountains to the
north, were its enemies. In the realms of supernal light sits
enthroned Ormuzd, the first-born of beings; around him are the six
Amshaspands, the twenty-eight Izeds, and the countless myriads of
Ferohers.[23] In the opposite kingdom of darkness Aherman is supreme,
and his throne is encompassed by the six Arch-Deevs, and the numerous
hosts of inferior Deevs. Between these rival powers ceaseless warfare
prevails; but at the end the prince of darkness will be subdued, and
peace and happiness prevail beneath the righteous sway of Ormuzd.

From this sublime system of religion probably arose the Peri-[24] or
Fairy-system of modern Persia; and thus what was once taught by sages,
and believed by monarchs, has shared the fate of everything human, and
has sunk from its pristine rank to become the material and the
machinery of poets and romancers. The wars waged by the fanatical
successors of the Prophet, in which literature was confounded with
idolatry, have deprived us of the means of judging of this system in
its perfect form; and in what has been written respecting the Peries
and their country since Persia has received the law of Mohammed, the
admixture of the tenets and ideas of Islam is evidently perceptible.
If, however, Orientalists be right in their interpretation of the name
of Artaxerxes' queen, Parisatis, as Pari-zadeh[25] (_Peri-born_), the
Peri must be coeval with the religion of Zoroaster.

The Peries and Deevs of the modern Persians answer to the good and
evil Jinn of the Arabs, of whose origin and nature we shall presently
give an account. The same Suleymans ruled over them as over the Jinn,
and both alike were punished for disobedience. It is difficult to say
which is the original; but when we recollect in how much higher a
state of culture the Persians were than the Arabs, and how well this
view accords with their ancient system of religion, we shall feel
inclined to believe that the Arabs were the borrowers, and that by
mingling with the Persian system ideas derived from the Jews, that one
was formed by them which is now the common property of all Moslems.

In like manner we regard the mountains of Kâf, the abode alike of Jinn
and of Peries and Deevs, as having belonged originally to Persian
geography. The fullest account of it appears in the Persian romance of
Hatim Taï,[26] the hero of which often visited its regions. From this it
would seem that this mountain-range was regarded as, like that of the
ancient Greek cosmology, surrounding the flat circular earth like a
ring, or rather like the bulwarks of a ship, outside of which flowed the
ocean; while some Arab authorities make it to lie beyond, and to enclose
the ocean as well as the earth.[27] It is said to be composed of green
chrysolite, the reflection of which gives its greenish tint to the sky.
According to some, its height is two thousand English miles.

Jinnestân is the common appellation of the whole of this ideal region.
Its respective empires were divided into many kingdoms, containing
numerous provinces and cities. Thus in the Peri-realms we meet with
the luxuriant province of Shad-u-kâm (_Pleasure and Delight_), with
its magnificent capital Juherabâd (_Jewel-city_), whose two kings
solicited the aid of Cahermân against the Deevs,[28] and also the
stately Amberabâd (_Amber-city_), and others equally splendid. The
metropolis of the Deev-empire is named Ahermanabâd (_Aherman's city_);
and imagination has lavished its stores in the description of the
enchanted castle, palace, and gallery of the Deev monarch, Arzshenk.

The Deevs and Peries wage incessant war with each other. Like mankind,
they are subject to death, but after a much longer period of
existence; and, though far superior to man in power, they partake of
his sentiments and passions.

We are told that when the Deevs in their wars make prisoners of the
Peries, they shut them up in iron cages, and hang them from the tops
of the highest trees, exposed to every gaze and to every chilling
blast. Here their companions visit them, and bring them the choicest
odours to feed on; for the ethereal Peri lives on perfume, which has
moreover the property of repelling the cruel Deevs, whose malignant
nature is impatient of fragrance.[29]

When the Peries are unable to withstand their foes, they solicit the
aid of some mortal hero. Enchanted arms and talismans enable him to cope
with the gigantic Deevs, and he is conveyed to Jinnestân on the back of
some strange and wonderful animal. His adventures in that country
usually furnish a wide field for poetry and romance to expatiate in.

The most celebrated adventurer in Jinnestân was Tahmuras, surnamed
Deev-bend (_Deev-binder_),[30] one of the ancient kings of Persia. The
Peries sent him a splendid embassy, and the Deevs, who dreaded him,
despatched another. Tahmuras, in doubt how to act, consults the
wonderful bird Seemurgh,[31] who speaks all languages, and whose
knowledge embraces futurity. She advises him to aid the Peries, warns
him of the dangers he has to encounter, and discloses his proper line
of action. She further offers to convey him to Jinnestân, and plucks
some feathers from her breast, with which the Persian monarch adorns
his helmet.

Mounted on the Seemurgh, and bracing on his arm the potent buckler of
Jân-ibn-Jân,[32] Tahmuras crosses the abyss impassable to unaided
mortality. The vizier Imlân, who had headed the Deev embassy,
deserting his original friends, had gone over to Tahmuras, and through
the magic arts of the Deev, and his own daring valour, the Persian
hero defeats the Deev-king Arzshenk. He next vanquishes a Deev still
more fierce, named Demrush, who dwelt in a gloomy cavern, surrounded
by piles of wealth plundered from the neighbouring realms of Persia
and India. Here Tahmuras finds a fair captive, the Peri Merjân,[33]
whom Demrush had carried off, and whom her brothers, Dâl Peri and
Milân Shâh Peri, had long sought in vain. He chains the Deev in the
centre of the mountain, and at the suit of Merjân hastens to attack
another powerful Deev named Houndkonz; but here, alas! fortune deserts
him, and, maugre his talismans and enchanted arms, the gallant
Tahmuras falls beneath his foe.

The great Deev-bend, or conqueror of Deevs, of the Shâh-Nâmeh[34] is the
illustrious Roostem. In the third of his Seven Tables or adventures, on
his way to relieve the Shâh Ky-Caoos, whom the artifice of a Deev had
led to Mazenderân, where he was in danger of perishing, he encounters in
the dark of the night a Deev named Asdeev, who stole on him in a
dragon's form as he slept. Twice the hero's steed, Reksh, awoke him, but
each time the Deev vanished, and Roostem was near slaying his good steed
for giving him a false alarm. The third time he saw the Deev and slew
him after a fearful combat. He then pursued his way to the cleft in the
mountain in which abode the great Deev Sefeed, or White Deev. The
seventh Table brought him to where lay an army of the Deev Sefeed's
Deevs, commanded by Arzshenk, whose head he struck off, and put his
troops to flight. At length he reached the gloomy cavern of the Deev
Sefeed himself, whom he found asleep, and scorning the advantage he
awoke him, and after a terrific combat deprived him also of life.

Many years after, when Ky-Khosroo sat on the throne, a wild ass of
huge size, his skin like the sun, and a black stripe along his back,
appeared among the royal herds and destroyed the horses. It was
supposed to be the Deev Akvân, who was known to haunt an adjacent
spring. Roostem went in quest of him; on the fourth day he found him
and cast his noose at him, but the Deev vanished. He re-appeared; the
hero shot at him, but he became again invisible. Roostem then let
Reksh graze, and laid him to sleep by the fount. As he slept, Akvân
came and flew up into the air with him; and when he awoke, he gave him
his choice of being let fall on the mountains or the sea. Roostem
secretly chose the latter, and to obtain it he pretended to have heard
that he who was drowned never entered paradise. Akvân thereupon let
him fall into the sea, from which he escaped, and returning to the
fount, he there met and slew the Deev. Roostem's last encounter with
Deevs was with Akvân's son, Berkhyas, and his army, when he went to
deliver Peshen from the dry well in which he was confined by Afrasiâb.
He slew him and two-thirds of his troops. Berkhyas is described as
being a mountain in size, his face black, his body covered with hair,
his neck like that of a dragon, two boar's tusks from his mouth, his
eyes wells of blood, his hair bristling like needles, his height 140
ells, his breadth 17, pigeons nestling in his snaky locks. Akvân had
had a head like an elephant.

In the Hindoo-Persian Bahar Danush (_Garden of Knowledge_) of
Ynâyet-ûllah, written in India A.D. 1650,[35] we find the following
tale of the Peries, which has a surprising resemblance to European
legends hereafter to be noticed.[36]


