                         MÜLLER.

      For then also in the country
      The good Dwarflings still kept house;
      Small in form, but highly gifted,
      And so kind and generous!


We now arrive at Switzerland, a country with which are usually
associated ideas of sublime and romantic scenery, simple manners, and
honest hearts. The character of the Swiss Dwarfs will be found to
correspond with these ideas. For, like the face of Nature, these
personifications of natural powers seem to become more gentle and mild
as they approach the sun and the south.

The Dwarfs, or little Hill- or Earth-men[298] of Switzerland, are
described as of a lively, joyous disposition, fond of strolling
through the valleys, and viewing and partaking in the labours of
agriculture. Kind and generous, they are represented as driving home
stray lambs, and leaving brushwood and berries in the way of poor
children. Their principal occupation is keeping cattle--not goats,
sheep, or cows, but the chamois, from whose milk they make excellent
and well-flavoured cheese. This cheese, when given by the Dwarfs to
any one, has the property of growing again when it has been cut or
bitten. But should the hungry owner be improvident enough to eat up
the whole of it and leave nothing from it to sprout from, he of course
has seen the end of his cheese.

The Kobolds are also to be met with in Switzerland. In the Vaudois,
they call them Servants,[299] and believe that they live in remote
dwellings and lonely shiels.[300] The most celebrated of them in those
parts is Jean de la Boliéta, or, as he is called in German, Napf-Hans,
_i. e._ Jack-of-the-Bowl, because it was the custom to lay for him
every evening on the roof of the cow-house a bowl of fresh sweet
cream, of which he was sure to give a good account. He used to lead
the cows to feed in the most dangerous places, and yet none of them
ever sustained the slightest injury. He always went along the same
steep path on which no one ever saw even a single stone lying, though
the whole side of the mountain was strewn as thickly as possible with
boulders. It is still called Boliéta's Path.[301]

Rationalising theory has been at work with the Swiss Dwarfs also. It
is supposed, that the early inhabitants of the Swiss mountains, when
driven back by later tribes of immigrants, retired to the high lands
and took refuge in the clefts and caverns of the mountains, whence
they gradually showed themselves to the new settlers--approached them,
assisted them, and were finally, as a species of Genii, raised to the
region of the wonderful.

For our knowledge of the Dwarf Mythology of Switzerland, we are
chiefly indebted to professor Wyss, of Bern, who has put some of the
legends in a poetical dress, and given others in the notes to his
Idylls as he styles them.[302] These legends were related by the
peasants to Mr. Wyss or his friends, on their excursions through the
mountains; and he declares that he has very rarely permitted himself
to add to, or subtract from, the peasants' narrative. He adds, that
the belief in these beings is strong in the minds of the people, not
merely in the mountain districts, but also at the foot of Belp
mountain, Belp, Gelterfingen, and other places about Bern.[303]

As a specimen of Mr. Wyss's manner of narrating these legends, we
give here a faithful translation of his first Idyll.[304]

