                          _The Nix-Labour._

A midwife related that her mother was one night called up, and desired
to make haste and come to the aid of a woman in labour. It was dark,
but notwithstanding she got up and dressed herself, and went down,
where she found a man waiting. She begged of him to stay till she
should get a lantern, and she would go with him; but he was urgent,
said he would show her the way without a lantern, and that there was
no fear of her going astray.

He then bandaged her eyes, at which she was terrified, and was going
to cry out; but he told her she was in no danger, and might go with
him without any apprehension. They accordingly went away together, and
the woman remarked that he struck the water with a rod, and that they
went down deeper and deeper till they came to a room, in which there
was no one but the lying-in woman.

Her guide now took the bandage off her eyes, led her up to the bed,
and recommending her to his wife, went away. She then helped to bring
the babe into the world, put the woman to bed, washed the babe, and
did everything that was requisite.

The woman, grateful to the midwife, then secretly said to her: "I am a
Christian woman as well as you; and I was carried off by a Water-man,
who changed me. Whenever I bring a child into the world he always eats
it on the third day. Come on the third day to your pond, and you will
see the water turned to blood. When my husband comes in now and offers
you money, take no more from him than you usually get, or else he will
twist your neck. Take good care!"

Just then the husband came in. He was in a great passion, and he
looked all about; and when he saw that all had gone on properly he
bestowed great praise on the midwife. He then threw a great heap of
money on the table, and said, "Take as much as you will!" She,
however, prudently answered, "I desire no more from you than from
others, and that is a small sum. If you give me that I am content; if
you think it too much, I ask nothing from you but to take me home
again." "It is God," says he, "has directed you to say that." He paid
her then the sum she mentioned, and conducted her home honestly. She
was, however, afraid to go to the pond at the appointed day.
