                              GERTRUDE.

        'Tis plain, however, of itself, and well
      Wise folks can see, that such an active race
      Would never with their hands before them sit.
      Ah! a right merry lively thing, and full
      Of roguish tricks, the little Hill-man is,
      And quickly too he gets into a rage,
      If you behave not toward him mannerly,
      And be not frank and delicate in your acts.
      But, above all things, they delight to dwell,
      Quiet and peaceful, in the secret clefts
      Of hills and mountains, evermore concealed.
      All through the winter, when with icy rind
      The frost doth cover o'er the earth, the wise
      And prudent little people keep them warm
      By their fine fires, many a fathom down
      Within the inmost rocks. Pure native gold,
      And the rock-crystals shaped like towers, clear,
      Transparent, gleam with colours thousandfold
      Through the fair palace, and the Little-folk,
      So happy and so gay, amuse themselves
      Sometimes with singing--Oh, so sweet! 'twould charm
      The heart of any one who heard it sound.
      Sometimes with dancing, when they jump and spring
      Like the young skipping kids in the Alp-grass.
        Then when the spring is come, and in the fields
      The flowers are blooming, with sweet May's approach,
      They bolts and bars take from their doors and gates,
      That early ere the hind or hunter stirs,
      In the cool morning, they may sport and play;
      Or ramble in the evening, when the moon
      Lights up the plains. Seldom hath mortal man
      Beheld them with his eyes; but should one chance
      To see them, it betokens suffering
      And a bad year, if bent in woe they glide
      Through woods and thickets; but the sight proclaims
      Joy and good luck, when social, in a ring,
      On the green meads and fields, their hair adorned
      With flowers, they shout and whirl their merry rounds.
      Abundance then they joyously announce
      For barn, for cellar, and for granary,
      And a blest year to men, to herds, and game.
      Thus they do constantly foreshow what will
      Befall to-morrow and hereafter; now
      Sighing, and still, by their lamenting tones,
      A furious tempest; and again, with sweet
      And smiling lips, and shouting, clear bright skies.[306]
        Chief to the poor and good, they love to show
      Kindness and favour, often bringing home
      At night the straying lambs, and oftener still
      In springtime nicely spreading, in the wood,
      Brushwood, in noble bundles, in the way
      Of needy children gone to fetch home fuel.
      Many a good little girl, who well obeyed
      Her mother,--or, mayhap, a little boy,--
      Has, with surprise, found lying on the hills
      Bright dazzling bowls of milk, and baskets too,
      Nice little baskets, full of berries, left
      By the kind hands of the wood-roaming Dwarfs.
        Now be attentive while I tell you one
      Out of a hundred and a hundred stories;
      'Tis one, however, that concerns us more
      Than all the rest, because it was my own
      Great-great-grandfather that the thing befell,
      In the old time, in years long since agone.
        Where from the lofty rocks the boundary runs
      Down to the vale, Barthel, of herdsmen first
      In all the country round, was ploughing up
      A spacious field, where he designed to try
      The seed of corn; but with anxiety
      His heart was filled, lest by any chance
      His venture should miscarry, for his sheep
      In the contagion he had lost, now poor
      And without skill, he ventures on the plough.
        Deliberate and still, at the plough-tail,
      In furrows he cuts up the grassy soil,
      While with the goad his little boy drives on
      The panting ox. When, lo! along the tall
      Rocky hill-side, a smoke ascends in clouds
      Like snow-flakes, soaring from the summit up
      Into the sky. At this the hungry boy
      Began to think of food, for the poor child
      Had tasted nothing all the live-long day
      For lunch, and, looking up, he thus began:
      "Ah! there the little Dwarf-folk are so gay
      At their grand cooking, roasting, boiling now,
      For a fine banquet, while with hunger I
      Am dying. Had we here one little dish
      Of the nice savoury food, were it but as
      A sign that there's a blessing on our work!"
        'Twas thus the boy spake, and his father ploughed
      Silently on, bent forwards o'er his work.
      They turn the plough; when huzza! lo! behold
      A miracle! there gleamed right from the midst
      Of the dark furrow, toward them, a bright
      Lustre, and there so charming! lay a plate
      Heaped up with roast meat; by the plate, a loaf
      Of bread upon the outspread table-cloth,
      At the disposal of the honest pair.
      Hurra! long live the friendly, generous Dwarfs!
        Barthel had now enough--so had the boy--
      And laughing gratefully and loud, they praise
      And thank the givers; then, with strength restored,
      They quick return unto their idle plough.
        But when again their day's task they resume,
      To break more of the field, encouraged now
      To hope for a good crop, since the kind Dwarfs
      Had given them the sign of luck they asked--
      Hush! bread and plate, and crums, and knife and fork,
      Were vanished clean; only--just for a sign
      For ever of the truth--lay on the ridge
      The white, nice-woven, pretty table-cloth.
