                        _Curiosity Punished._

In old times men lived in the valley, and around them, in the clefts and
holes of the rocks, dwelt the Dwarfs. They were kind and friendly to
the people, often performing hard and heavy work for them in the night;
and when the country-people came early in the morning with their carts
and tools, they saw, to their astonishment, that the work was already
done, while the Dwarfs hid themselves in the bushes, and laughed aloud
at the astonished rustics. Often, too, were the peasants incensed to
find their corn, which was scarcely yet ripe, lying cut on the ground;
but shortly after there was sure to come on such a hail-storm, that it
became obvious that hardly a single stalk could have escaped destruction
had it not been cut, and then, from the bottom of their hearts, they
thanked the provident Dwarf-people. But at last mankind, through their
own folly, deprived themselves of the favour and kindness of the Dwarfs;
they fled the country, and since that time no mortal eye has seen them.
The cause of their departure was this:

A shepherd had a fine cherry-tree[310] that stood on the mountain.
When in the summer the fruit had ripened, it happened that, three
times running, the tree was stript, and all the fruit spread out on
the benches and hurdles, where the shepherd himself used to spread it
out to dry for the winter. The people of the village all said, "It
could be none but the good-natured Dwarfs, who come by night tripping
along with their feet covered with long mantles, as light as birds,
and industriously perform for mankind their daily work. People have
often watched them," continued the narrators, "but no one disturbs
them; they are left to come and go as they please." This talk only
excited the curiosity of the shepherd, and he longed to know why it
was that the Dwarfs so carefully concealed their feet, and whether
they were differently formed from those of men. Accordingly, next
year, when the summer came, and the time when the Dwarfs secretly
pulled the cherries, and brought them to the barn, the shepherd took a
sack full of ashes, and strewed them about under the cherry-tree. Next
morning, at break of day, he hastened to the place: the tree was
plucked completely empty, and he saw the marks of several goose-feet
impressed on the ashes. The shepherd then laughed and jested at
having discovered the Dwarfs' secret. But soon after the Dwarfs broke
and laid waste their houses, and fled down deeper in the mountain to
their splendid secret palace, that had long lain empty to receive
them. Vexed with mankind, they never more granted them their aid; and
the imprudent shepherd who had betrayed them became sickly, and
continued so to the end of his life.[311]

