
Thus far the Chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire, and, except in the
poets, we have met with no further account of, or allusion to,
fairies, until the reign of Elizabeth, when a little work appeared,
named, The mad Pranks and merry Jests of Robin Goodfellow,[328] from
which Shakespeare seems in a good measure to have derived his Puck.

This work consists of two parts. In the first we are informed that Robin
was the offspring of a "proper young wench by a hee-fayrie, a king or
something of that kind among them." By the time he was six years old he
was so mischievous and unlucky that his mother found it necessary to
promise him a whipping. He ran away and engaged with a tailor, from whom
also he soon eloped. When tired he sat down and fell asleep, and in his
sleep he had a vision of fairies; and when he awoke he found lying
beside him a scroll, evidently left by his father, which, in verses
written in letters of gold, informed him that he should have any thing
he wished for, and have also the power of turning himself "To horse, to
hog, to dog, to ape," etc., but he was to harm none but knaves and
queans, and was to "love those that honest be, and help them in
necessity." He made trials of his power and found that he really
possessed it. His first exploit was to turn himself into a horse, to
punish a churlish clown, whom he induced to mount him, and gave him a
fall that went well nigh to break his neck. The fellow then went to ride
him through a great plash of water, "and in the middle of it he found
himself with nothing but a pack-saddle between his legs, while Robin
went off laughing, _Ho, ho, hoh_! He next exerted himself in the cause
of two young lovers, and secured their happiness.

In the Second Part we find him more in the character of the Nis or
Brownie. Coming to a farmer's house, he takes a liking to a "good
handsome maid," that was there, and in the night does her work for
her, at breaking hemp and flax, bolting meal, etc. Having watched one
night and seen him at work, and observed that he was rather bare of
clothes, she provided him with a waistcoat against the next night.
But when he saw it he started and said:--

      Because thou layest me himpen hampen
      I will neither bolt nor stampen:
      'Tis not your garments, new or old,
      That Robin loves: I feel no cold.
      Had you left me milk or cream,
      You should have had a pleasing dream:
      Because you left no drop or crum,
      Robin never more will come.

He went off laughing _Ho, ho, hoh_! and the maid in future had to do
all the work herself.

A company of young fellows who had been making merry with their
sweethearts were coming home over a heath. Robin met them, and to make
himself merry took the form of _a walking fire_, and led them up and
down till daylight, and then went off saying:--

      Get you home, you merry lads:
      Tell your mammies and your dads,
      And all those that news desire,
      How you saw a walking fire.
      Wenches that do smile and lispe,
      Use to call me Willy Wispe.
      If that you but weary be,
      It is sport alone for me.
      Away: unto your houses go,
      And I'll go laughing, _Ho, ho, hoh_!

A fellow was attempting to offer violence to a young maiden. Robin
came to her aid, ran between his legs in the shape of a hare, then
turning himself into a horse, carried him off on his back, and flung
him into a thick hedge.

Robin fell in love with a weaver's pretty wife, and for her sake took
service with her husband. The man caught them one day kissing, and next
night he went and took Robin as he was sleeping, up out of his bed, and
went to the river and threw him in. But instantly he heard behind him--

      For this your service, master, I you thank.
      Go swim yourself; I'll stay upon the bank;

and was pushed in by Robin, who had put a bag of yarn in his bed, and
now went off with, _Ho, ho, hoh_!

Robin went as a fiddler to a wedding. When the candles came he blew
them out, and giving the men boxes in the ears he set them a-fighting.
He kissed the prettiest girls, and pinched the others, till he made
them scratch one another like cats. When the posset was brought forth,
he turned himself into a bear, and frightening them away, had it all
to himself.

At length his father who we now find was king Obreon (i.e.
Oberon),[329] called him up out of his bed one night, and took him to
where the fairies were dancing to the music of Tom Thumb's bagpipe,
and thence to Fairy-land, where he "did show him many secrets which he
never did open to the world."

In the same work Sib says of the woman-fairies:

"To walk nightly as do the men-fairies we use not; but now and then we
go together, and at good housewives' fires we warm our fairy
children.[330] If we find clean water and clean towels we leave them
money, either in their basins, or in their shoes; but if we find no
clean water in their houses, we wash our children in their pottage,
milk, or beer, or whatever we find: for the sluts that have not such
things fitting, we wash their faces and hands with a gilded child's
clout, or else carry them to some river and duck them over head and
ears. We often use to dwell in some great hill, and from thence we do
lend money to any poor man or woman that hath need; but if they bring
it not again at the day appointed, we do not only punish them with
pinching, but also in their goods, so that they never thrive till they
have paid us."

The learned and strong-minded Reginald Scot, thus notices the
superstitions of his own and the preceding age.[331]

"Indeed your grandams' maids were wont to set a bowl of milk before
him (Incubus) and his cousin Robin Goodfellow, for grinding of malt or
mustard, and sweeping the house at midnight; and you have also heard
that he would chafe exceedingly if the maid or good-wife of the house,
having compassion of his nakedness, laid any clothes for him besides
his mess of white bread and milk, which was his standing fee; for in
that case he saith,

      What have we here? Hemten, hamten,
      Here will I never more tread nor stampen.

Again:[332]

"The Faeries do principally inhabit the mountains and caverns of the
earth, whose nature is to make strange apparitions on the earth, in
meadows or on mountains, being like men and women, soldiers, kings,
and ladies, children and horsemen, clothed in green, to which purpose
they do in the night steal hempen stalks from the fields where they
grow, to convert them into horses, as the story goes.

"Such jocund and facetious spirits," he continues, "are said to sport
themselves in the night by tumbling and fooling with servants and
shepherds in country houses, pinching them black and blue, and leaving
bread, butter, and cheese, sometimes with them, which, if they refuse
to eat, some mischief shall undoubtedly befal them by the means of
these Faeries; and many such have been taken away by the said spirits
for a fortnight or a month together, being carried with them in
chariots through the air, over hills and dales, rocks and precipices,
till at last they have been found lying in some meadow or mountain,
bereaved of their senses, and commonly one of their members to boot."

Elsewhere[333] he gives the following goodly catalogue of these
objects of popular terror:--"Our mother's maids have so frayed us with
Bull-beggars, Spirits, Witches, Urchins, Elves, Hags, Faeries, Satyrs,
Pans, Faunes, Sylens, Kit-wi-the-Canstick, Tritons, Centaurs, Dwarfs,
Gyants, Impes, Calcars, Conjurors, Nymphs, Changelings, Incubus, Robin
Goodfellow, the Spoorn, the Mare, the Man-in-the-Oak, the Hell-wain,
the Firedrake, the Puckle, Tom-thombe, Hob-goblin, Tom-tumbler,
Boneless, and such other Bugs, that we are afraid of our shadow."[334]

Burton, after noticing from Paracelsus those which in Germany "do
usually walk in little coats, some two foot long," says,[335] "A
bigger kind there is of them called with us Hobgoblins and Robin
Goodfellows, that would, in those superstitious times, grind corn for
a mess of milk, cut wood, or do any manner of drudgery work." And
again: "Some put our Fairies into this rank (that of terrestrial
devils), which have been in former times adored with much
superstition, with sweeping their houses, and setting of a pail of
clean water, good victuals, and the like, and then they should not be
pinched, but find money in their shoes, and be fortunate in their
enterprises." In another place (p. 30,) he says, "And so those which
Miyaldus calls _Ambulones_, that walk about midnight, on heaths and
desert places, which (saith Lavater) draw men out of the way and lead
them all night a by-way, or quite barre them of their way; these have
several names, in several places; we commonly call them _Pucks_."

Harsenet thus speaks of them in his Declaration:[336]--

"And if that the _bowl_ of curds and _cream_ were not _duly set_ out
for Robin Goodfellow, the _friar_, and Sisse the dairy-maid, why then,
either the pottage was burned the next day in the pot, or the cheeses
would not curdle, or the butter would not come, or the ale in the fat
never would have good head. But if a Peter-penny or a Housle-egge[337]
were behind, or a patch of tythe unpaid--then 'ware of bull-beggars,
spirits, &c."

Nash thus describes them:[338]--

"Then ground they malt, and had hempen shirts for their labours;
daunced in rounds in green meadows; pincht maids in their sleep that
swept not their houses clean, and led poor travellers out of their way."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the celebrated Luck of Eden Hall is supposed to have been a
chalice, due respect for the piety of our forefathers will not allow
of our placing the desecration of it any higher than the reign of
Elizabeth, or that of her father at farthest. We will therefore
introduce its history in this place.
