
In the beginning of the last century Bourne thus gives the popular
belief on this subject:

"Another part of this (winter's evening) conversation generally turns
upon Fairies. These, they tell you, have frequently been seen and heard;
nay, that there are some still living who were stolen away by them, and
confined seven years. According to the description they give of them,
who pretend to have seen them, they are in the shape of men exceeding
little: they are always clad in green, and frequent the woods and
fields. When they make cakes (which is a work they have been often heard
at), they are very noisy; and when they have done, they are full of
mirth and pastime. But generally they dance in moonlight, when mortals
are asleep, and not capable of seeing them; as may be observed on the
following morning, their dancing places being very distinguishable: for
as they dance hand in hand, and so make a circle in their dance, so next
day there will be seen rings and circles on the grass."[345]

The author of "Round about our Coalfire" says:[346]

"My grandmother has often told me of Fairies dancing upon our green,
and they were _little little creatures, clothed in green_.

"The moment any one saw them, and took notice of them, they were
struck blind of an eye. They lived under ground, and generally came
out of a mole-hill.

"They had fine music always among themselves, and danced in a
moonshiny night around, or in a ring, as one may see at this day upon
every common in England, where mushrooms grow.

"When the master and mistress were laid on their pillows, the men and
maids, if they had a game at romp, and blundered upstairs, or jumbled
a chair, the next morning every one would swear it was the fairies,
and that they heard them stamping up and down stairs all night, crying
'Water's locked! Water's locked!' when there was not water in every
pail in the kitchen."

To come to the present times. There is no stronger proof of the
neglect of what Mr Thoms has very happily designated "Folk-lore" in
this country, than the fact of there having been no account given
anywhere of the Pixies or Pisgies[347] of Devonshire and Cornwall,
till within these last few years. In the year 1836, Mrs. Bray, a lady
well known as the author of several novels, and wife of a clergyman at
Tavistock, published, in a series of letters to Robert Southey,
interesting descriptions of the part of Devonshire bordering on the
Tamar and the Tavy. In this work there is given an account of the
Pixies, from which we derive the following information:

According to the Devon peasant, the Pixies are the souls of infants
who died before they were baptised. They are of small dimensions,
generally handsome in their form. Their attire is always green.
Dancing is their chief amusement, which they perform to the music of
the cricket, the grasshopper, and the frog,--always at night; and thus
they form the fairy-rings. The Pixy-house is usually in a rock. By
moon-light, on the moor, or under the dark shade of rocks, the
Pixy-monarch, Mrs. Bray says, holds his court, where, like Titania, he
gives his subjects their several charges. Some are sent to the mines,
where they will kindly lead the miner to the richest lode, or
maliciously, by noises imitating the stroke of the hammer, and by
false fires, draw him on to where the worst ore in the mine lies, and
then laugh at his disappointment. Others are sent

      To make the maids their sluttery rue,
      By pinching them both black and blue.

On this account, says Mrs. Bray, "the good dames in this part of the
world are very particular in sweeping their houses before they go to
bed; and they will frequently place a basin of water beside the
chimney-nook, to accommodate the Pixies, who are great lovers of
water; and sometimes they requite the good deed by dropping a piece of
money into the basin. A young woman of our town, who declared she had
received the reward of sixpence for a like service, told the
circumstance to her gossips; but no sixpence ever came again, and it
was generally believed that the Pixies had taken offence by her
chattering, as they do not like to have their deeds, good or evil,
talked over by mortal tongues."

The office of some is to steal children; of others, to lead travellers
astray, as Will-o'-the-wisps, or to _Pixy-lead_ them, as it is termed.
Some will make confusion in a house by blowing out the candle, or
kissing the maids "with a smack, as they 'shriek Who's this?' as the
old poet writes, till their grandams come in and lecture them for
allowing unseemly freedoms with their bachelors." Others will make
noises in walls, to frighten people. In short, everything that is done
elsewhere by fairies, boggarts, or other like beings, is done in Devon
by the Pixies.

It is said that they will sometimes aid their favourites in spinning
their flax. "I have heard a story about an old woman in this town,"
says Mrs. Bray, "who suspected she received assistance of the above
nature; and one evening, coming suddenly into the room, she spied a
ragged little creature, who jumped out of the door. She thought she
would try still further to win the services of her elfin friend, and
so bought some smart new clothes, as big as those made for a doll.
These pretty things she placed by the side of her wheel. The Pixy
returned, and put them on; when, clapping her tiny hands, she was
heard to exclaim--

      Pixy fine, Pixy gay,
      Pixy now will run away;

and off she went. But the ungrateful little creature never spun for
the poor old woman after."

Mrs. Bray has been assured that mothers used frequently to pin their
children to their sides, to prevent their being stolen by the Pixies;
and she heard of a woman in Tavistock who avowed that her mother had a
child which was stolen by them, as she was engaged hanging out clothes
to dry in her garden. She almost broke her heart when she discovered
it; but she took great care of the changeling, which so pleased the
Pixy, that she soon after gave the woman back her child, who proved
eminently lucky in after life.

The being _Pixy-led_ is a thing very apt to befall worthy yeomen
returning at night from fair or market, especially if they sat long at
the market-table; and then, says our authority, "he will declare, and
offer to take his Bible-oath upon it, that, as sure as ever he's alive
to tell it, whilst his head was running round like a mill-wheel, he
heard with his own ears they bits of Pisgies a-laughing and
a-_tacking_ their hands, all to see he led-astray, and never able to
find the right road, though he had travelled it scores of times long
agone, by night or by day, as a body might tell." Mr. Thoms, too, was
told by a Devon girl, who had often heard of the Pixies, though she
had never seen any, that "she once knew a man who, one night, could
not find his way out of his own fields, all he could do, until he
recollected to _turn his coat_; and the moment he did so, he heard the
Pixies all fly away, up into the trees, and there they sat and
laughed. Oh! how they did laugh! But the man then soon found his way
out of the field."

This turning of the coat, or some other article of dress, is found to
be the surest remedy against Pixy-illusion. Mrs. Bray says that the
old folk in Tavistock have recourse to it as a preventive against
being _Pixy-led_, if they have occasion to go out after sun-down. It
appears to have been formerly in use in other parts of England also;
for Bishop Corbet thus notices it in his "Iter Boreale:"

                                  William found
      A mean for our deliverance, _Turne your cloakes_
      Quoth hee, for Pucke is busy in these oakes;
      If ever wee at Bosworth will be found
      Then _turne your cloakes_, for this is fairy ground.

In Scandinavia, also, we learn the remedy against being led astray by
the Lygtemand, Lyktgubhe, or Will-o'-the-Wisp, is to turn one's cap
inside out.

Mrs. Bray gives, in addition, the following legends, which we have
taken the liberty of abridging a little.

