                           _The Peri-Wife._

The son of a merchant in a city of Hindostan, having been driven from
his father's house on account of his undutiful conduct, assumed the
garb of a Kalenderee or wandering Derweesh, and left his native town.
On the first day of his travels, being overcome with fatigue before he
reached any place of rest, he went off the high road and sat down at
the foot of a tree by a piece of water: while he sat there, he saw at
sunset four doves alight from a tree on the edge of the pond, and
resuming their natural form (for they were Peries) take off their
clothes and amuse themselves by bathing in the water. He immediately
advanced softly, took up their garments, without being seen, and
concealed them in the hollow of a tree, behind which he placed
himself. The Peries when they came out of the water and missed their
clothes were distressed beyond measure. They ran about on all sides
looking for them, but in vain. At length, finding the young man and
judging that he had possessed himself of them, they implored him to
restore them. He would only consent on one condition, which was that
one of them should become his wife. The Peries asserted that such a
union was impossible between them whose bodies were formed of fire and
a mortal who was composed of clay and water; but he persisted, and
selected the one which was the youngest and handsomest. They were at
last obliged to consent, and having endeavoured to console their
sister, who shed copious floods of tears at the idea of parting with
them and spending her days with one of the sons of Adam; and having
received their garments, they took leave of her and flew away.

The young merchant then led home his fair bride and clad her
magnificently; but he took care to bury her Peri-raiment in a secret
place, that she might not be able to leave him. He made every effort
to gain her affections, and at length succeeded in his object "she
placed her foot in the path of regard, and her head on the carpet of
affection." She bore him children, and gradually began to take
pleasure in the society of his female relatives and neighbours. All
doubts of her affection now vanished from his mind, and he became
assured of her love and attachment.

At the end of ten years the merchant became embarrassed in his
circumstances, and he found it necessary to undertake a long voyage.
He committed the Peri to the care of an aged matron in whom he had the
greatest confidence, and to whom he revealed the secret of her real
nature, and showed the spot where he had concealed her raiment. He
then "placed the foot of departure in the stirrup of travel," and set
out on his journey. The Peri was now overwhelmed with sorrow for his
absence, or for some more secret cause, and continually uttered
expressions of regret. The old woman sought to console her, assuring
her that "the dark night of absence would soon come to an end, and the
bright dawn of interview gleam from the horizon of divine bounty." One
day when the Peri had bathed, and was drying her amber-scented tresses
with a corner of her veil, the old woman burst out into expressions of
admiration at her dazzling beauty. "Ah, nurse," replied she, "though
you think my present charms great, yet had you seen me in my native
raiment, you would have witnessed what beauty and grace the Divine
Creator has bestowed upon Peries; for know that we are among the most
finished portraits on the tablets of existence. If then thou desirest
to behold the skill of the divine artist, and admire the wonders of
creation, bring the robes which my husband has kept concealed, that I
may wear them for an instant, and show thee my native beauty, the like
of which no human eye, but my lord's, hath gazed upon."

The simple woman assented, and fetched the robes and presented them to
the Peri. She put them on, and then, like a bird escaped from the
cage, spread her wings, and, crying Farewell, soared to the sky and
was seen no more. When the merchant returned from his voyage "and
found no signs of the rose of enjoyment on the tree of hope, but the
lamp of bliss extinguished in the chamber of felicity, he became as
one Peri-stricken,[37] a recluse in the cell of madness. Banished
from the path of understanding, he remained lost to all the bounties
of fortune and the useful purposes of life."

       *       *       *       *       *