                               PREFACE.


A preface is to a book what a prologue is to a play--a usual, often
agreeable, but by no means necessary precursor. It may therefore be
altered or omitted at pleasure. I have at times exercised this right,
and this is the third I have written for the present work.

In the first, after briefly stating what had given occasion to it, I
gave the germs of the theory which I afterwards developed in the Tales
and Popular Fictions. The second contained the following paragraph:--

"I never heard of any one who read it that was not pleased with it. It
was translated into German as soon as it appeared, and was very
favourably received. Goethe thought well of it. Dr. Jacob Grimm--perhaps
the first authority on these matters in Europe--wrote me a letter
commending it, and assuring me that even to _him_ it offered something
new; and I was one Christmas most agreeably surprised by the receipt of
a letter from Vienna, from the celebrated orientalist, Jos Von Hammer,
informing me that it had been the companion of a journey he had lately
made to his native province of Styria, and had afforded much pleasure
and information to himself and to some ladies of high rank and
cultivated minds in that country. The initials at the end of the
preface, he said, led him to suppose it was a work of mine. So far for
the Continent. In this country, when I mention the name of Robert
Southey as that of one who has more than once expressed his decided
approbation of this performance, I am sure I shall have said quite
enough to satisfy any one that the work is not devoid of merit."

I could now add many names of distinguished persons who have been
pleased with this work and its pendent, the Tales and Popular Fictions.
I shall only mention that of the late Mr. Douce, who, very shortly
before his death, on the occasion of the publication of this last work,
called on me to assure me that "it was many, many years indeed, since he
had read a book which had yielded him so much delight."

The contents of the work which gave such pleasure to this learned
antiquary are as follows:--

    I. Introduction--Similarity of Arts and Customs--Similarity of
    Names--Origin of the Work--Imitation--Casual
    Coincidence--Milton--Dante. II. The Thousand and One
    Nights--Bedoween Audience around a Story-teller--Cleomades and
    Claremond--Enchanted Horses--Peter of Provence and the fair
    Maguelone. III. The Pleasant Nights--The Dancing Water, the Singing
    Apple, and the Beautiful Green Bird--The Three Little
    Birds--Lactantius--Ulysses and Sindbad. IV. The Shâh-Nâmeh--Roostem
    and Soohrâb--Conloch and Cuchullin--Macpherson's Ossian--Irish
    Antiquities. V. The Pentamerone--Tale of the Serpent--Hindoo Legend.
    VI. Jack the Giant-killer--The Brave Tailoring--Thor's Journey to
    Utgard--Ameen of Isfahan and the Ghool--The Lion and the Goat--The
    Lion and the Ass. VII. Whittington and his Cat--Danish
    Legends--Italian Stories--Persian Legend. VIII. The Edda--Sigurd and
    Brynhilda--Völund--Helgi--Holger Danske--Ogier le
    Danois--Toko--William Tell. IX. Peruonto--Peter the Fool--Emelyan
    the Fool--Conclusion. Appendix.

Never, I am convinced, did any one enter on a literary career with
more reluctance than I did when I found it to be my only
resource--fortune being gone, ill health and delicacy of constitution
excluding me from the learned professions, want of interest from
every thing else. As I journeyed to the metropolis, I might have sung
with the page whom Don Quixote met going a-soldiering:

      A la guerra me lleva--mi necesidad,
      Si tuviera dineros--no fuera en verdad

for of all arts and professions in this country, that of literature is
the least respected and the worst remunerated. There is something
actually degrading in the expression "an author by trade," which I have
seen used even of Southey, and that by one who did not mean to disparage
him in the slightest degree. My advice to those who may read these pages
is to shun literature, if not already blest with competence.

One of my earliest literary friends in London was T. Crofton Croker,
who was then engaged in collecting materials for the Fairy Legends of
the South of Ireland. He of course applied to his friends for aid and
information; and I, having most leisure, and, I may add, most
knowledge, was able to give him the greatest amount of assistance. My
inquiries on the subject led to the writing of the present work, which
was succeeded by the Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy, and the
Tales and Popular Fictions; so that, in effect, if Mr. Croker had not
planned the Fairy Legends, these works, be their value what it may,
would in all probability never have been written.

Writing and reading about Fairies some may deem to be the mark of a
trifling turn of mind. On this subject I have given my ideas in the
Conclusion; here I will only remind such critics, that as soon as this
work was completed, I commenced, and wrote in the space of a few
weeks, my Outlines of History; and whatever the faults of that work
may be, no one has ever reckoned among them want of vigour in either
thought or expression. It was also necessary, in order to write this
work and its pendent, to be able to read, perhaps, as many as eighteen
or twenty different languages, dialects, and modes of orthography,
and to employ different styles both in prose and verse. At all events,
even if it were trifling, _dulce est desipere in loco_; and I shall
never forget the happy hours it caused me, especially those spent over
the black-letter pages of the French romances of chivalry, in the old
reading-room of the British Museum.

Many years have elapsed since this work was first published. In that
period much new matter has appeared in various works, especially in the
valuable Deutsche Mythologie of Dr. Grimm. Hence it will be found to be
greatly enlarged, particularly in the sections of England and France. I
have also inserted much which want of space obliged me to omit in the
former edition. In its present form, I am presumptuous enough to expect
that it may live for many years, and be an authority on the subject of
popular lore. The active industry of the Grimms, of Thiele, and others,
had collected the popular traditions of various countries. I came then
and gathered in the harvest, leaving little, I apprehend, but gleanings
for future writers on this subject. The legends will probably fade fast
away from the popular memory; it is not likely that any one will relate
those which I have given over again; and it therefore seems more
probable that this volume may in future be reprinted, with notes and
additions. For human nature will ever remain unchanged; the love of gain
and of material enjoyments, omnipotent as it appears to be at present,
will never totally extinguish the higher and purer aspirations of mind;
and there will always be those, however limited in number, who will
desire to know how the former dwellers of earth thought, felt, and
acted. For these mythology, as connected with religion and history, will
always have attractions.

  October, 1850.

Whatever errors have been discovered are corrected in this impression.

  January, 1870.      T. K.



