                          _The Fary Labour._

Another tale relates that a messenger having visited a country midwife
or _howdie_ requested her professional assistance in a case where so
much secrecy was required that she must be conducted to and from the
destined place blindfolded; she at first hesitated, but her scruples
were overcome by a handsome present, the promise of a future reward,
and assurance of perfect personal safety. She then submitted to the
required condition, mounted behind the messenger on a fleet charger,
and was carried forward in an unaccountable manner. The journey was
not of long continuance, the steed halted, she dismounted, and was
conducted into a cottage where the bandage was removed from her eyes;
everything appeared neat and comfortable. She was shown the woman "in
the straw," and performed her office; but when ready to dress the
babe, an old woman, (who, according to the narration, appears to have
been the nurse,) put a box of ointment into her hand, requiring her to
anoint the child all over with it, but to be careful that it did not
touch her own person; she prudently complied, though wondering at the
motive. Whilst this operation was going on, she felt an itching in one
of her eyes, and in an unguarded moment rubbed it with a finger which
had touched the mysterious ointment. And now a new scene forced itself
upon her astonished vision, and she saw everything in a different
light; instead of the neat cottage, she perceived the large
overhanging branches of an ancient oak, whose hollow and moss-grown
trunk she had before mistaken for the fire place, glowworms supplied
the place of lamps, and, in short, she found herself in the abode of a
family of faries, with faries was she surrounded, and one of their
number reposed on her lap. She however retained her self-possession,
finished her task, and was conducted homeward in the same manner as
she was brought. So far all went well, and the _howdie_ might have
carried the secret to her grave, but in after time, on a market-day
(in what town the legend saith not,) forgetful of her former caution,
she saw the old nurse among the countrywomen, gliding about from one
basket to another, passing a little wooden scraper along the rolls of
butter, and carefully collecting the particles thus purloined into a
vessel hung by her side. After a mutual but silent recognition, the
nurse addressed her thus, "Which eye do you see me with?" "With this,"
innocently answered the other. No sooner had she spoken than a puff
from the withering breath of her unearthly companion extinguished the
ill-fated orb for ever, and the hag instantly vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *