                      _Maid's Metamorphosis._

      Helping all _urchin-blasts_ and ill-luck signs,
      That the shrewd meddling elfe delights to make.
                                       _Comus_, 845.

Urchin is a hedgehog, as Stevens has justly observed,[378] and in
these lines of Titus Andronicus (ii. 3.)

      A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,
      Ten thousand swelling toads, as many _urchins_,

it probably has this sense. We still call the _echinus marinus_ the
Sea-urchin. Still as we have no analogy, but rather the contrary, for
transferring the name of an animal to the elves, we feel inclined to
look for a different origin of the term as applied to these beings. The
best or rather only hypothesis we have met with[379] is that which finds
it in the hitherto unexplained word _Orcneas_ in Beówulf, which may have
been _Orcenas_, and if, as we have supposed,[380] the Anglo-Saxons
sometimes pronounced _c_ before _e_ and _i_ in the Italian manner, we
should have, if needed, the exact word. We would also notice the old
German _urkinde_, which Grimm renders _nanus_.[381]

We now come to the poets.

In Beówulf, an Anglo-Saxon poem, supposed not to be later than the
seventh century, we meet with the following verse,

      "Eotenas, and Ylfe,
       And Orcneas."

The first of these words is evidently the same as the Iötunn or Giants
of the northern mythology; the second is as plainly its Alfar, and we
surely may be excused for supposing that the last may be the same as
its Duergar.

Layamon, in the twelfth century, in his poetic paraphrase of Wace's
Brut,[382] thus expands that poet's brief notice of the birth of
Arthur:--

                      "Ertur son nom; de sa bunte
                       Ad grant parole puis este."

      Sone swa he com on eorthe,        So soon he came on earth,
      Alven hine ivengen.               Elves received him.
      Heo bigolen that child            They enchanted that child
      Mid galdere swith stronge.        With magic most strong.
      Heo zeven him mihte               They gave him might
      To beon best alre cnihton.        To be the best of all knights.
      Heo zeven him an other thing      They gave him another thing
      That he scolde beon riche king.   That he should be a rich king.
      Heo zeven him that thridde        They gave him the third
      That he scolde longe libben.      That he should long live.
      Heo zeven that kin-bern           They gave to that kingly child
      Custen swithe gode.               Virtues most good.
      That he was mete-custi            That he was most generous
      Of alle quike monnen.             Of all men alive.
      This the Alven him zef.           This the Elves him gave.
                                                       vv. 19254: _seq._

If we have made any discovery of importance in the department of
romantic literature, it is our identification of Ogier le Danois with
the Eddaic Helgi.[383] We have shown among other points of
resemblance, that as the Norns were at the birth of the one, so the
Fées were at that of the other. With this circumstance Layamon was
apparently acquainted, and when he wished to transfer it to Arthur as
the Norns were no longer known and the Fees had not yet risen into
importance, there only remained for him to employ the Elves, which had
not yet acquired tiny dimensions. Hence then we see that the progress
was Norns, Elves, Fées, and these last held their place in the
subsequent Fairy tales of France and Italy.

These potent Elves are still superior to the popular Fairies which we
first met with in Chaucer.

Yet nothing in the passages in which he speaks of them leads to the
inference of his conceiving them to be of a diminutive stature. His
notions, indeed, on the subject seem very vague and unsettled; and
there is something like a confusion of the Elves and Fairies of
Romance, as the following passages will show:--

The Wife of Bathes Tale is evidently a Fairy tale. It thus commences:

      In oldè dayès of the king Artoúr,
      Of which that Bretons speken gret honoúr,
      All was this lond fulfilled of faërie;[384]
      The Elf-quene with her joly compagnie,
      Danced ful oft in many a grenè mede.
      This was the old opinion as I rede;
      I speke of many hundred yeres ago.
      But now can no man see non elvès mo,
      For now the gretè charitee and prayéres
      Of limitoures, and other holy freres,
      That serchen every land and every streme,
      As thikke as motès in the sonnè-beme,
      Blissing halles, chambres, kichenès, and boures,
      Citees and burghès, castles highe, and toures,
      Thropès[385] and bernès, shepenes and dairiés,
      This maketh that there ben no faëries;
      For there as wont to walken was an elf,
      There walketh now the limitour himself,
      In undermelès,[386] and in morweninges,
      And sayth his matines and his holy thinges,
      As he goth in his limitatioun.
      Women may now go safely up and down;
      In every bush and under every tree
      There is none other incubus but he,
      And he ne will don hem no dishonoúr.

The Fairies therefore form a part of the tale, and they are thus
introduced:

      The day was come that homward must he turne;
      And in his way it happed him to ride,
      In all his care, under a forest side,
      Wheras he saw upon a dancè go
      Of ladies foure and twenty, and yet mo:
      Toward this ilke dance he drow ful yerne,
      In hope that he som wisdom shuldè lerne;
      But certainly, er he came fully there,
      Yvanished was this dance, he n'iste not wher;
      No creäture saw he that barè lif,
      Save on the grene he saw sitting a wif,
      A fouler wight ther may no man devise.

These ladies bear a great resemblance to the Elle-maids of
Scandinavia. We need hardly inform our readers that this "foul wight"
becomes the knight's deliverer from the imminent danger he is in, and
that, when he has been forced to marry her, she is changed into a
beautiful young maiden. But who or what she was the poet sayeth not.

In the Marchantes Tale we meet the Faerie attendant on Pluto and
Proserpina, their king and queen, a sort of blending of classic and
Gothic mythology:

                                  for to tell
      The beautee of the gardin, and the well
      That stood under a laurer alway grene;
      Ful often time he Pluto, and his quene
      Proserpina, and alle hir faërie[387]
      Disporten hem, and maken melodie
      About that well, and daunced, as men told.

Again, in the same Tale:

      And so befel in that bright morwe tide,
      That, in the gardin, on the ferther side,
      Pluto, that is the king of Faërie,
      And many a ladye in his compagnie,
      Folwing his wif, the quene Proserpina,
      Which that he ravisshed out of Ethná,
      While that she gadred floures in the mede,
      (In Claudian ye may the story rede,
      How that hire in his grisely carte he fette);
      This king of Faërie adoun him sette
      Upon a benche of turvès, fresh and grene.


In the conversation which ensues between these august personages,
great knowledge of Scripture is displayed; and the queen, speaking of
the "sapient prince," passionately exclaims--

      I setè nat of all the vilanie
      That he of women wrote a boterflie;
      I am a woman nedès moste I speke,
      Or swell unto that time min hertè breke.

Some might suspect a mystery in the queen's thus emphatically styling
herself a woman, but we lay no stress upon it, as Faire Damoselle
Pertelote, the hen, who was certainly less entitled to it, does the
same.

In the Man of Lawes Tale the word Elfe is employed, but whether as
equivalent to witch or fairy is doubtful.

      This lettre spake, the quene delivered was
      Of so horríble a fendliche creätúre,
      That in the castle, non so hardy was,
      That any whilè dorste therein endure.
      The mother was an _elfe_ by áventure,
      Y come, by charmès or by sorcerie,
      And everich man hateth hire compagnie.[388]

The Rime of Sir Thopas has been already considered as belonging to
romance.

It thus appears that the works of manners-painting Chaucer give very
little information respecting the popular belief in Fairies of his
day. Were it not for the sly satire of the passage, we might be apt to
suspect that, like one who lived away from the common people, he was
willing to represent the superstition as extinct--"But now can no man
see non elves mo." The only trait that he gives really characteristic
of the popular elves is their love of dancing.

In the poets that intervene between Chaucer and the Maiden Reign, we
do not recollect to have noticed anything of importance respecting
Fairies, except the employment, already adverted to, of that term, and
that of Elves, by translators in rendering the Latin _Nymphæ_. Of the
size of these beings, the passages in question give no information.

But in Elizabeth's days, "Fairies," as Johnson observes, "were much in
fashion; common tradition had made them familiar, and Spenser's poem had
made them great." A just remark, no doubt, though Johnson fell into the
common error of identifying Spenser's Fairies with the popular ones.

The three first books of the Faerie Queene were published in 1590,
and, as Warton remarks, Fairies became a familiar and fashionable
machinery with the poets and poetasters. Shakspeare, well acquainted,
from the rural habits of his early life, with the notions of the
peasantry respecting these beings, and highly gifted with the
prescient power of genius, saw clearly how capable they were of being
applied to the production of a species of the wonderful, as pleasing,
or perhaps even more so, than the classic gods; and in the
Midsummer-Night's Dream he presented them in combination with the
heroes and heroines of the mythic age of Greece. But what cannot the
magic wand of genius effect? We view with undisturbed delight the
Elves of Gothic mythology sporting in the groves of Attica, the
legitimate haunts of Nymphs and Satyrs.

Shakspeare, having the Faerie Queene before his eyes, seems to have
attempted a blending of the Elves of the village with the Fays of
romance. His Fairies agree with the former in their diminutive
stature,--diminished, indeed, to dimensions inappreciable by village
gossips,--in their fondness for dancing, their love of cleanliness,
and their child-abstracting propensities. Like the Fays, they form a
community, ruled over by the princely Oberon and the fair
Titania.[389] There is a court and chivalry: Oberon would have the
queen's sweet changeling to be a "Knight of his train to trace the
forest wild." Like earthly monarchs, he has his jester, "the shrewd
and knavish sprite, called Robin Good-fellow."

The luxuriant imagination of the poet seemed to exult in pouring forth
its wealth in the production of these new actors on the mimic scene, and
a profusion of poetic imagery always appears in their train. Such lovely
and truly British poetry cannot be too often brought to view; we will
therefore insert in this part of our work several of these gems of our
Parnassus, distinguishing by a different character such acts and
attributes as appear properly to belong to the Fairy of popular belief.

