
The Peri has been styled "the fairest creation of poetical imagination."
No description can equal the beauty of the female Peri,[38] and the
highest compliment a Persian poet can pay a lady is to liken her to one
of these lovely aerial beings.[39] Thus Sâdee, in the lines prefixed to
this section, declares that only the beauty of a Peri can be compared
with that of the fair one he addresses; and more lately, Aboo Taleeb
Khân says to Lady Elgin, as he is translated by M. von Hammer,[40]

      The sun, the moon, the Peries, and mankind,
      Compared with you, do far remain behind;
      For sun and moon have never form so mild,
      The Peries have, but roam in deserts wild.

Sir W. Ouseley is at a loss what to compare them to. They do not, he
thinks, resemble the Angels, the Cherubim and Seraphim of the Hebrews,
the Dæmons of the Platonists, or the Genii of the Romans; neither do
they accord with the Houri of the Arabs. Still less do they agree with
the Fairies of Shakspeare; for though fond of fragrance, and living
on that sweet essential food, we never find them employed in

      Killing cankers in the musk-rose buds,

or obliged

      To serve the fairy queen
      To dew her orbs upon the green.

Neither is their stature ever represented so diminutive as to make
key-holes pervious to their flight, or the bells of flowers their
habitations. But Milton's sublime idea of a 'faery vision,' he thinks,
corresponds more nearly with what the Persian poets have conceived of
the Peries.

      Their port was more than human, as they stood;
      I took it for a faery vision
      Of some gay creatures of the element
      That in the colours of the rainbow live
      And play i' the plighted clouds. I was awestruck,
      And as I pass'd I worshipp'd.--_Comus._

"I can venture to affirm," concludes Sir William gallantly, "that he
will entertain a pretty just idea of a Persian Peri, who shall fix his
eyes on the charms of a beloved and beautiful mistress."

If poetic imagination exhausted itself in portraying the beauty of the
Peries, it was no less strenuous in heaping attributes of deformity on
the Deevs. They may well vie in ugliness with the devils of our
forefathers. "At Lahore, in the Mogul's palace," says William Finch,
"are pictures of Dews, or Dives, intermixed in most ugly shapes, with
long horns, staring eyes, shaggy hair, great fangs, ugly paws, long
tails, with such horrible difformity and deformity, that I wonder the
poor women are not frightened therewith."[41]

Such then is the Peri-system of the Mohammedan Persians, in which the
influence of Islâm is clearly perceptible, the very names of their
fabled country and its kings being Arabic. Had we it as it was before
the Arabs forced their law on Persia, we should doubtless find it more
consistent in all its parts, more light, fanciful, and etherial.
