                  _Dorylas with a bevy of Fairies._

        _Dor._ How like you now, my Grace? Is not my countenance
      Royal and full of majesty? Walk not I
      Like the young prince of pygmies? Ha, my knaves,
      We'll fill our pockets. Look, look yonder, elves;
      Would not yon apples tempt a better conscience
      Than any we have, to rob an orchard? Ha!
      Fairies, like nymphs with child, must have the things
      They long for. You sing here a fairy catch
      In that strange tongue I taught you, while ourself
      Do climb the trees. Thus princely Oberon
      Ascends his throne of state.

        _Elves._   Nos beata Fauni proles,
                        Quibus non est magna moles,
                        Quamvis Lunam incolamus.
                        Hortos sæpe frequentamus.

                        Furto cuncta magis bella,
                        Furto dulcior puella,
                        Furto omnia decora,
                        Furto poma dulciora.

                        Cum mortales lecto jacent,
                        Nobis poma noctu placent;
                        Illa tamen sunt ingrata
                        Nisi furto sint parata.

Jocastus and his man Bromius come upon the Elves while plundering the
orchard: the latter is for employing his cudgel on the occasion, but
Jocastus is overwhelmed by the condescension of the princely Oberon in
coming to his orchard, when

      His Grace had orchards of his own more precious
      Than mortals can have any.

The Elves, by his master's permission, pinch Bromius, singing,

      Quoniam per te violamur,
      Ungues hic experiamur;
      Statim dices tibi datam
      Cutem valde variatam.

Finally, when the coast is clear, Oberon cries,

      So we are got clean off; come, noble peers
      Of Fairy, come, attend our royal Grace.
      Let's go and share our fruit with our queen Mab
      And the other dairy-maids; where of this theme
      We will discourse amidst our cakes and cream.

               Cum tot poma habeamus,
               Triumphos læti jam canamus;
               Faunos ego credam ortos,
               Tantum ut frequentent hortos.

               I domum, Oberon, ad illas,
               Quæ nos manent nunc, ancillas,
               Quarum osculemur sinum,
               Inter poma lac et vinum.

In the old play of Fuimus Troes are the following lines:[404]

      Fairies small,
      Two foot tall,
      With caps red
      On their head,
      Danse around
      On the ground.

The pastoral poets also employed the Fairy Mythology. Had they used it
exclusively, giving up the Nymphs, Satyrs, and all the rural rout of
antiquity, and joined with it faithful pictures of the scenery England
then presented, with just delineations of the manners and character of
the peasantry, the pastoral poetry of that age would have been as
unrivalled as its drama. But a blind admiration of classic models, and
a fondness for allegory, were the besetting sins of the poets. They
have, however, left a few gems in this way.

Britannia's Pastorals furnish the following passages:[405]

      Near to this wood there lay a pleasant mead,
      Where fairies often did their measures tread,
      Which in the meadows made such circles green,
      As if with garlands it had crowned been;
      Or like the circle where the signs we track,
      And learned shepherds call 't the Zodiac;
      Within one of these rounds was to be seen
      A hillock rise, where oft the fairy-queen
      At twilight sate, and did command her elves
      To pinch those maids that had not swept their shelves;
      And, further, if, by maiden's oversight,
      Within doors water was not brought at night,
      Or if they spread no table, set no bread,
      They should have nips from toe unto the head;
      And for the maid who had perform'd each thing,
      She in the water-pail bade leave a ring.
                                             _Song 2._

      Or of the faiery troops which nimbly play,
      And by the springs dance out the summer's day,
      Teaching the little birds to build their nests,
      And in their singing how to keepen rests.
                                             _Song 4._

      As men by fairies led fallen in a dream.
                                             _Ibid._

In his Shepherd's Pipe, also, Brown thus speaks of the Fairies:--

      Many times he hath been seen
      With the fairies on the green,
      And to them his pipe did sound
      While they danced in a round.
      Mickle solace they would make him,
      And at midnight often wake him
      And convey him from his room
      To a field of yellow-broom;
      Or into the meadows where
      Mints perfume the gentle air,
      And where Flora spreads her treasure;
      There they would begin their measure.
      If it chanced night's sable shrouds
      Muffled Cynthia up in clouds,
      Safely home they then would see him,
      And from brakes and quagmires free him.

But Drayton is the poet after Shakespeare for whom the Fairies had the
greatest attractions. Even in the Polyolbion he does not neglect them.
In Song xxi., Ringdale, in Cambridgeshire, says,

        For in my very midst there is a swelling ground
      About which Ceres' nymphs dance many a wanton round;
      The frisking fairy there, as on the light air borne,
      Oft run at barley-break upon the cars of corn;
      And catching drops of dew in their lascivious chases,
      Do cast the liquid pearl in one another's faces.

And in Song iv., he had spoken of

      The feasts that underground the faëry did him (Arthur) make,
      And there how he enjoyed the Lady of the Lake.

Nymphidia is a delicious piece of airy and fanciful invention. The
description of Oberon's palace in the air, Mab's amours with the
gentle Pigwiggin, the mad freaks of the jealous Oberon, the pygmy
Orlando, the mutual artifices of Puck and the Fairy maids of honour,
Hop, Mop, Pip, Trip, and Co., and the furious combat of Oberon and the
doughty Pigwiggin, mounted on their earwig chargers--present
altogether an unequalled fancy-piece, set in the very best and most
appropriate frame of metre.

It contains, moreover, several traits of traditionary Fairy lore, such
as in these lines:--

      Hence shadows, seeming idle shapes
      Of little frisking elves and apes,
      To earth do make their wanton skapes
        As hope of pastime hastes them;
      Which maids think on the hearth they see,
      When fires well near consumed be,
      There dancing hays by two and three,
        Just as their fancy casts them.[406]

      These make our girls their sluttery rue,
      By pinching them both black and blue,
      And put a penny in their shoe.
        The house for cleanly sweeping;
      And in their courses make that round,
      In meadows and in marshes found,
      Of them so call'd the fairy ground,
        Of which they have the keeping.

      These, when a child haps to be got,
      That after proves an idiot,
      When folk perceive it thriveth not,
        The fault therein to smother,
      Some silly, doating, brainless calf,
      That understands things by the half,
      Says that the fairy left this aulf,
        And took away the other.

And in these:--

      Scarce set on shore but therewithal
      He meeteth Puck, whom most men call
      Hobgoblin, and on him doth fall
        With words from frenzy spoken;
      "Ho! ho!" quoth Puck, "God save your Grace!
      Who drest you in this piteous case?
      He thus that spoiled my sovereign's face,
        I would his neck were broken.

      This Puck seems but a dreaming dolt.
      Still walking like a ragged colt,
      And oft out of a bush doth bolt,
        Of purpose to deceive us;
      And leading us, makes us to stray
      Long winter nights out of the way;
      And when we stick in mire and clay,
        He doth with laughter leave us.

In his Poet's Elysium there is some beautiful Fairy poetry, which we do
not recollect to have seen noticed any where. This work is divided into
ten Nymphals, or pastoral dialogues. The Poet's Elysium is, we are told,
a paradise upon earth, inhabited by Poets, Nymphs, and the Muses.

      The poet's paradise this is,
      To which but few can come,
      The Muses' only bower of bliss,
      Their dear Elysium.

In the eighth Nymphal,

      A nymph is married to a fay,
      Great preparations for the day,
      All rites of nuptials they recite you
      To the bridal, and invite you.

The dialogue commences between the nymphs Mertilla and Claia:--

      _M._ But will our Tita wed this fay?

      _C._ Yes, and to-morrow is the day.

      _M._ But why should she bestow herself
                Upon this dwarfish fairy elf?

      _C._ Why, by her smallness, you may find
                That she is of the fairy kind;
                And therefore apt to choose her make
                Whence she did her beginning take;
                Besides he's deft and wondrous airy,
                And of the noblest of the fairy,[407]
                Chief of the Crickets,[408] of much fame,
                In Fairy a most ancient name.

The nymphs now proceed to describe the bridal array of Tita: her
jewels are to be dew-drops; her head-dress the "yellows in the
full-blown rose;" her gown

      Of pansy, pink, and primrose leaves,
      Most curiously laid on in threaves;

her train the "cast slough of a snake;" her canopy composed of "moons
from the peacock's tail," and "feathers from the pheasant's head;"

      Mix'd with the plume (of so high price),
      The precious bird of paradise;

and it shall be

      Borne o'er our head (by our inquiry)
      By elfs, the fittest of the fairy.

Her buskins of the "dainty shell" of the lady-cow. The musicians are
to be the nightingale, lark, thrush, and other songsters of the grove.

      But for still music, we will keep
      The wren and titmouse, which to sleep
      Shall sing the bride when she's alone,
      The rest into their chambers gone;
      And like those upon ropes that walk
      On gossamer from stalk to stalk,
      The tripping fairy tricks shall play
      The evening of the wedding day.

Finally, the bride-bed is to be of roses; the curtains, tester, and
all, of the "flower imperial;" the fringe hung with harebells; the
pillows of lilies, "with down stuft of the butterfly;"

      For our Tita is to-day,
      To be married to a fay.

In Nymphal iii.,

      The fairies are hopping,
      The small flowers cropping,
      And with dew dropping,
        Skip thorow the greaves.

      At barley-break they play
      Merrily all the day:
      At night themselves they lay
        Upon the soft leaves.

And in Nymphal vi. the forester says,

      The dryads, hamadryads, the satyrs, and the fawns,
      Oft play at hide-and-seek before me on the lawns;
      The frisking fairy oft, when horned Cynthia shines,
      Before me as I walk dance wanton matachines.

Herrick is generally regarded as the Fairy-poet, _par excellence_;
but, in our opinion, without sufficient reason, for Drayton's Fairy
pieces are much superior to his. Indeed Herrick's Fairy-poetry is by
no means his best; and we doubt if he has anything to exceed in that
way, or perhaps equal, the light and fanciful King Oberon's Apparel of
Smith.[409]

Milton disdained not to sing

      How faëry Mab the junkets eat.
      She was pinch'd and pull'd, she said;
      And he, by _friar's_ lantern led,[410]
      Tells how the drudging Goblin sweat
      To earn his _cream bowl duly set_,
      When in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
      His shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn
      That ten day-labourers could not end;
      Then lies him down, the lubber fiend,
      And stretch'd out all the chimney's length,
      Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
      And, crop-full, out of doors he flings,
      Ere the first cock his matin rings.

Regardless of Mr. Gifford's sneer at "those who may undertake the
unprofitable drudgery of tracing out the property of every word, and
phrase, and idea in Milton,"[411] we will venture to trace a little
here, and beg the reader to compare this passage with one quoted above
from Harsenet, and to say if the resemblance be accidental. The truth
is, Milton, reared in London, probably knew the popular superstitions
chiefly or altogether from books; and almost every idea in this passage
may be found in books that he must have read.

In the hands of Dryden the Elves of Chaucer lose their indefiniteness.
In the opening of the Wife of Bath her Tale,

      The king of elves and _little_ fairy queen
      Gamboled on heaths and danced on every green.

And

      In vain the dairy now with mint is dressed,
      The dairy-maid expects no fairy guest
      To skim the bowls, and after pay the feast.
      She sighs, and shakes her empty shoes in vain,
      No silver penny to reward her pain.

In the Flower and the Leaf, unauthorised by the old bard, he makes the
knights and dames, the servants of the Daisy and of the Agnus Castus,
Fairies, subject, like the Italian Fate, to "cruel Demogorgon."

Pope took equal liberties with his original, as may be seen by a
comparison of the following verses with those quoted above:--

      About this spring, if ancient fame say true,
      The dapper elves their moonlight sports pursue:
      Their pigmy king and little fairy queen
      In circling dances gamboled on the green,
      While tuneful sprites a merry concert made,
      And airy music warbled through the shade.
                                        _January and May_, 459.

      It so befel, in that fair morning tide,
      The fairies sported on the garden's side,
      And in the midst their monarch and his bride.
      So featly tripp'd the light-foot ladies round,
      The knight so nimbly o'er the greensward bound,
      That scarce they bent the flowers or touch'd the ground.
      The dances ended, all the fairy train
      For pinks and daisies search'd the flowery plain.[412]
                                                  _Ibid._, 617.

With the Kensington Garden[413] of Tickell, Pope's contemporary, our
Fairy-poetry may be said to have terminated.[414] Collins, Beattie,
and a few other poets of the last century make occasional allusions to
it, and some attempts to revive it have been made in the present
century. But vain are such efforts, the belief is gone, and divested
of it such poetry can produce no effect. The Fairies have shared the
fate of the gods of ancient Hellas.
