                          SCOTTISH LOWLANDS.

      When from their hilly dens, at midnight hour,
        Forth rush the airy elves in mimic state,
      And o'er the moonlight heath with swiftness scour,
        In glittering arms the little horsemen shine.
                                               ERSKINE.


The Scottish Fairies scarcely differ in any essential point from those
of England. Like them they are divided into the rural and the
domestic. Their attire is green, their residence the interior of the
hills. They appear more attached than their neighbours to the
monarchical form of government, for the Fairy king and queen, who seem
in England to have been known only by the poets, were recognised by
law in Caledonia, and have at all times held a place in the popular
creed. They would appear also to be more mischievously inclined than
the Southrons, and less addicted to the practice of dancing. They
have, however, had the advantage of not being treated with contempt
and neglect by their human countrymen, and may well be proud of the
attention shown them by the brightest genius of which their country
can boast. There has also been long due from them an acknowledgment of
the distinction conferred on them by the editor of the Nithsdale and
Galloway Song,[415] for the very fanciful manner in which he has
described their attributes and acts.

The Scottish Fairies have never been taken by the poets for their
heroes or machinery, a circumstance probably to be attributed to the
sterner character of Scottish religion. We cannot, therefore, as in
England, make a distinction between popular and poetic fairies.

The earliest notice we have met with of the Fairies is in Montgomery's
Flyting against Polwart, where he says,

      In the hinder end of harvest, at All-hallowe'en,
        When our _good neighbours_[416] dois ride, if I read right,
      Some buckled on a beenwand, and some on a been,
        Ay trottand in troops from the twilight;
      Some saidled on a she-ape all graithed in green,
        Some hobland on a hempstalk hovand to the sight;
      The king of Phairie and his court, with the elf-queen,
        With many elfish incubus, was ridand that night.

Elf-land was the name of the realm ruled by the king of Phairie. King
James[417] speaks of him and his queen, and "of sic a jolie court and
traine as they had; how they had a teinde and a dewtie, as it were, of
all guidis; how they naturally raid and yeid, eat and drank, and did
all other actions lyke natural men and women. I think," concludes the
monarch, "it is lyker Virgilis _Campi Elysii_ nor anything that ought
to be believed by Christianis." And one of the interlocutors in his
dialogue asks how it was that witches have gone to death confessing
that they had been "transported with the Phairie to such and such a
hill, which, opening, they went in, and there saw a faire queene, who,
being now lighter, gave them a stone which had sundry virtues."

According to Mr. Cromek, who, however, rather sedulously keeps their
darker attributes out of view, and paints everything relating to them
_couleur de rose_, the Lowland Fairies are of small stature, but
finely proportioned; of a fair complexion, with long yellow hair
hanging over their shoulders, and gathered above their heads with
combs of gold. They wear a mantle of green cloth, inlaid with wild
flowers; green pantaloons, buttoned with bobs of silk; and silver
shoon. They carry quivers of "adder-slough," and bows made of the ribs
of a man buried where _three lairds' lands meet_; their arrows are
made of bog-reed, tipped with white flints, and dipped in the dew of
hemlock; they ride on steeds whose hoofs "would not dash the dew from
the cup of a harebell." With their arrows they shoot the cattle of
those who offend them; the wound is imperceptible to common eyes, but
there are gifted personages who can discern and cure it.[418]

In their intercourse with mankind they are frequently kind and generous.
A young man of Nithsdale, when out on a love affair, heard most
delicious music, far surpassing the utterance of 'any mortal mixture of
earth's mould.' Courageously advancing to the spot whence the sound
appeared to proceed, he suddenly found himself the spectator of a
Fairy-banquet. A green table with feet of gold, was laid across a small
rivulet, and supplied with the finest of bread and the richest of wines.
The music proceeded from instruments formed of reeds and stalks of corn.
He was invited to partake in the dance, and presented with a cup of
wine. He was allowed to depart in safety, and ever after possessed the
gift of second sight. He said he saw there several of his former
acquaintances, who were become members of the Fairy society.

We give the following legend on account of its great similarity to a
Swiss tradition already quoted:--

Two lads were ploughing in a field, in the middle of which was an old
thorn-tree, a trysting place of the Fairy-folk. One of them described a
circle round the thorn, within which the plough should not go. They were
surprised, on ending the furrow, to behold a green table placed there,
heaped up with excellent bread and cheese, and even wine. The lad who
had drawn the circle sat down without hesitation, ate and drank
heartily, saying, "Fair fa' the hands whilk gie." His companion whipped
on the horses, refusing to partake of the Fairy-food. The other, said
Mr. Cromek's informant, "thrave like a breckan," and was a proverb for
wisdom, and an oracle for country knowledge ever after.[419]

The Fairies lend and borrow, and it is counted _uncanny_ to refuse them.
A young woman was one day sifting meal warm from the mill, when a nicely
dressed beautiful little woman came to her with a bowl of antique form,
and requested the loan of as much meal as would fill it. Her request was
complied with, and in a week she returned to make repayment. She set
down the bowl and breathed over it, saying, "Be never toom." The woman
lived to a great age, but never saw the bottom of the bowl.

Another woman was returning late one night from a gossiping. A pretty
little boy came up to her and said, "Coupe yere dish-water farther
frae yere door-step, it pits out our fire." She complied with this
reasonable request, and prospered ever after.

