                           ARABIAN ROMANCE.

The Prophet is the centre round which every thing connected with Arabia
revolves. The period preceding his birth is regarded and designated as
the times of ignorance, and our knowledge of the ancient Arabian
mythology comprises little more than he has been pleased to transmit to
us. The Arabs, however, appear at no period of their history to have
been a people addicted to fanciful invention. Their minds are acute and
logical, and their poetry is that of the heart rather than of the fancy.
They dwell with fondness on the joys and pains of love, and with
enthusiasm describe the courage and daring deeds of warriors, or in
moving strains pour forth the plaintive elegy; but for the description
of gorgeous palaces and fragrant gardens, or for the wonders of magic,
they are indebted chiefly to their Persian neighbours.[42]

What classes of beings the popular creed may have recognised before
the establishment of Islâm we have no means of ascertaining.[43] The
Suspended Poems, and Antar, give us little or no information; we only
know that the tales of Persia were current among them, and were
listened to with such avidity as to rouse the indignation of the
Prophet. We must, therefore, quit the tents of the Bedoween, and the
valleys of 'Araby the Blest,' and accompany the khaleefehs to their
magnificent capital on the Tigris, whence emanated all that has thrown
such a halo of splendour around the genius and language of Arabia. It
is in this seat of empire that we must look to meet with the origin of
the marvels of Arabian literature.

Transplanted to a rich and fertile soil, the sons of the desert
speedily abandoned their former simple mode of life; and the court of
Bagdad equalled or surpassed in magnificence any thing that the East
has ever witnessed. Genius, whatever its direction, was encouraged and
rewarded, and the musician and the story-teller shared with the
astronomer and historian the favour of the munificent khaleefehs. The
tales which had amused the leisure of the Shahpoors and Yezdejirds
were not disdained by the Haroons and Almansoors. The expert narrators
altered them so as to accord with the new faith. And it was thus,
probably, that the delightful Thousand and One Nights[44] were
gradually produced and modified.

As the Genii or Jinn[45] are prominent actors in these tales, where
they take the place of the Persian Peries and Deevs, we will here give
some account of them.

According to Arabian writers, there is a species of beings named Jinn
or Jân (Jinnee _m._, Jinniyeh _f. sing._), which were created and
occupied the earth several thousand years before Adam. A tradition
from the Prophet says that they were formed of "smokeless fire,"
_i.e._ the fire of the wind Simoom. They were governed by a succession
of forty, or, as others say, seventy-two monarchs, named Suleyman, the
last of whom, called Jân-ibn-Jân, built the Pyramids of Egypt.
Prophets were sent from time to time to instruct and admonish them;
but on their continued disobedience, an army of angels appeared, who
drove them from the earth to the regions of the islands, making many
prisoners, and slaughtering many more. Among the prisoners, was a
young Jinnee, named 'Azâzeel, or El-Hârith (afterwards called Iblees,
from his _despair_), who grew up among the angels, and became at last
their chief. When Adam was created, God commanded the angels to
worship him; and they all obeyed except Iblees, who, for his
disobedience, was turned into a Sheytân or Devil, and he became the
father of the Sheytâns.[46]

The Jinn are not immortal; they are to survive mankind, but to die
before the general resurrection. Even at present many of them are slain
by other Jinn, or by men; but chiefly by shooting-stars hurled at them
from Heaven. The fire of which they were created, circulates in their
veins instead of blood, and when they receive a mortal wound, it bursts
forth and consumes them to ashes. They eat and drink, and propagate
their species. Sometimes they unite with human beings, and the offspring
partakes of the nature of both parents. Some of the Jinn are obedient to
the will of God, and believers in the Prophet, answering to the Peries
of the Persians; others are like the Deevs, disobedient and malignant.
Both kinds are divided into communities, and ruled over by princes. They
have the power to make themselves visible and invisible at pleasure.
They can assume the form of various animals, especially those of
serpents, cats, and dogs. When they appear in the human form, that of
the good Jinnee is usually of great beauty; that of the evil one, of
hideous deformity, and sometimes of gigantic size.

When the Zôba'ah, a whirlwind that raises the sand in the form of a
pillar of tremendous height, is seen sweeping over the desert, the
Arabs, who believe it to be caused by the flight of an evil Jinnee,
cry, Iron! Iron! (_Hadeed!_ _Hadeed!_) or Iron! thou unlucky one!
(_Hadeed! yâ meshoom!_) of which metal the Jinn are believed to have a
great dread. Or else they cry, God is most great! (_Allâhu akbar!_)
They do the same when they see a water-spout at sea; for they assign
the same cause to its origin.[47]

The chief abode of the Jinn of both kinds is the Mountains of Kâf,
already described. But they also are dispersed through the earth, and
they occasionally take up their residence in baths, wells, latrinæ,
ovens, and ruined houses.[48] They also frequent the sea and rivers,
cross-roads, and market-places. They ascend at times to the confines
of the lowest heaven, and by listening there to the conversation of
the angels, they obtain some knowledge of futurity, which they impart
to those men who, by means of talismans or magic arts, have been able
to reduce them to obedience.[49]

The following are anecdotes of the Jinn, given by historians of
eminence.[50]

It is related, says El-Kasweenee, by a certain narrator of traditions,
that he descended into a valley with his sheep, and a wolf carried off
a ewe from among them; and he arose and raised his voice, and cried,
"O inhabitant of the valley!" whereupon he heard a voice saying, "O
wolf, restore him his sheep!" and the wolf came with the ewe and left
her, and departed.

Ben Shohnah relates, that in the year 456 of the Hejra, in the reign
of Kaiem, the twenty-sixth khaleefeh of the house of Abbas, a report
was raised in Bagdad, which immediately spread throughout the whole
province of Irak, that some Turks being out hunting saw in the desert
a black tent, beneath which there was a number of people of both
sexes, who were beating their cheeks, and uttering loud cries, as is
the custom in the East when any one is dead. Amidst their cries they
heard these words--_The great king of the Jinn is dead, woe to this
country!_ and then there came out a great troop of women, followed by
a number of other rabble, who proceeded to a neighbouring cemetery,
still beating themselves in token of grief and mourning.

The celebrated historian Ebn Athir relates, that when he was at Mosul
on the Tigris, in the year 600 of the Hejra, there was in that country
an epidemic disease of the throat; and it was said that a woman, of
the race of the Jinn, having lost her son, all those who did not
condole with her on account of his death were attacked with that
disease; so that to be cured of it men and women assembled, and with
all their strength cried out, _O mother of Ankood, excuse us! Ankood
is dead, and we did not mind it!_
