                            _The Brownie._

The Nis, Kobold, or Goblin, appears in Scotland under the name of
Brownie.[422] Brownie is a personage of small stature, wrinkled visage,
covered with short curly brown hair, and wearing a brown mantle and
hood. His residence is the hollow of an old tree, a ruined castle, or
the abode of man. He is attached to particular families, with whom he
has been known to reside, even for centuries, threshing the corn,
cleaning the house, and doing everything done by his northern and
English brethren. He is, to a certain degree, disinterested; like many
great personages, he is shocked at anything approaching to the name of a
bribe or _douceur_, yet, like them, allows his scruples to be overcome
if the thing be done in a genteel, delicate, and secret way. Thus, offer
Brownie a piece of bread, a cup of drink, or a new coat and hood, and he
flouted at it, and perhaps, in his huff, quitted the place for ever; but
leave a nice bowl of cream, and some fresh honeycomb, in a snug private
corner, and they soon disappeared, though Brownie, it was to be
supposed, never knew anything of them.

A good woman had just made a web of linsey-woolsey, and, prompted by
her good nature, had manufactured from it a snug mantle and hood for
her little Brownie. Not content with laying the gift in one of his
favourite spots, she indiscreetly called to tell him it was there.
This was too direct, and Brownie quitted the place, crying,

      A new mantle and a new hood;
      Poor Brownie! ye'll ne'er do mair gude!

Another version of this legend says, that the gudeman of a farm-house
in the parish of Glendevon having left out some clothes one night for
Brownie, he was heard to depart, saying,

      Gie Brownie coat, gie Brownie sark,
      Ye'se get nae mair o' Brownie's wark![423]

At Leithin-hall, in Dumfrieshire, a Brownie had dwelt, as he himself
declared, for three hundred years. He used to show himself but once to
each master; to other persons he rarely discovered more than his hand.
One master was greatly beloved by Brownie, who on his death bemoaned
him exceedingly, even abstaining from food for many successive days.
The heir returning from foreign parts to take possession of the
estate, Brownie appeared to do him homage, but the Laird, offended at
his mean, starved appearance, ordered him meat and drink, and new
livery. Brownie departed, loudly crying,

      Ca', cuttee, ca'!
      A' the luck of Leithin Ha'
      Gangs wi' me to Bodsbeck Ha'.

In a few years Leithin Ha' was in ruins, and "bonnie Bodsbeck"
flourishing beneath the care of Brownie.

Others say that it was the gudeman of Bodsbeck that offended the
Brownie by leaving out for him a mess of bread and milk, and that he
went away, saying,

      Ca, Brownie, ca',
      A' the luck of Bodsbeck awa to Leithenha'.

Brownie was not without some roguery in his composition. Two lasses
having made a fine bowlful of buttered brose, had taken it into the
byre to sup in the dark. In their haste they brought but one spoon,
so, placing the bowl between them, they supped by turns. "I hae got
but three sups," cried the one, "and it's a' dune."--"It's a' dune,
indeed," cried the other.--"Ha, ha, ha!" cried a third voice, "Brownie
has got the maist o' it."--And Brownie it was who had placed himself
between them, and gotten two sups for their one.

The following story will remind the reader of Hinzelmann. A Brownie
once lived with Maxwell, Laird of Dalswinton, and was particularly
attached to the Laird's daughter, the comeliest lass in all the holms
of Nithsdale. In all her love affairs Brownie was her confidant and
assistant; when she was married, it was Brownie who undressed her for
the bridal bed; and when a mother's pains first seized her, and a
servant, who was ordered to go fetch the _cannie wife_, who lived on
the other side of the Nith, was slow in getting himself ready,
Brownie, though it was one of dark December's stormy nights, and the
wind was howling through the trees, wrapped his lady's fur cloak about
him, mounted the servant's horse, and dashed through the waves of the
foaming Nith. He went to the cannie wife, got her up behind him, and,
to her terror and dismay, plunged again into the torrent. "Ride nae by
the auld pool," said she, "lest we suld meet wi' Brownie." "Fear nae,
dame," replied he, "ye've met a' the Brownies ye will meet." He set
her down at the hall steps, and went to the stable. There finding the
lad, whose embassy he had discharged, but drawing on his boots, he
took off the bridle, and by its vigorous application instilled into
the memory of the loitering loon the importance of dispatch. This was
just at the time of the Reformation, and a zealous minister advised
the Laird to have him baptised. The Laird consented, and the worthy
minister hid himself in the barn. When Brownie was beginning his
night's work, the man of God flung the holy water in his face,
repeating at the same time the form of baptism. The terrified Brownie
gave a yell of dismay, and disappeared for ever.

Another name by which the domestic spirit was known in some parts of
Scotland was Shellycoat, of which the origin is uncertain.[424]
