                               IRELAND.

        Like him, the Sprite,
        Whom maids by night
      Oft meet in glen that's haunted.
                                 MOORE.


We commence our survey of the lands of Celts and Cymry with Ireland,
as being the first in point of importance, but still more as being the
land of our birth. It is pleasing to us, now in the autumn of our
life, to return in imagination to where we passed its spring--its most
happy spring. As we read and meditate, its mountains and its vales,
its verdant fields and lucid streams, objects on which we probably
never again shall gaze, rise up in their primal freshness and beauty
before us, and we are once more present, buoyant with youth, in the
scenes where we first heard the fairy-legends of which we are now to
treat. Even the forms of the individual peasants who are associated
with them in our memory, rise as it were from their humble
resting-places and appear before us, again awaking our sympathies;
for, we will boldly assert it, the Irish peasantry, with all their
faults, gain a faster hold on the affections than the peasantry of any
other country. We speak, however, particularly of them as they were in
our county and in our younger days; for we fear that they are somewhat
changed, and not for the better. But our present business is with the
Irish fairies rather than with the Irish people.

The fairies of Ireland can hardly be said to differ in any respect
from those of England and Scotland. Like them they are of diminutive
size, rarely exceeding two feet in height; they live also in society,
their ordinary abode being the interior of the mounds, called in
Irish, Raths (_Râhs_), in English, Moats, the construction of which
is, by the peasantry, ascribed to the Danes from whom, it might thence
perhaps be inferred, the Irish got their fairies direct and not _viâ_
England. From these abodes they are at times seen to issue mounted on
diminutive steeds, in order to take at night the diversion of the
chase. Their usual attire is green with red caps.[427] They are fond
of music, but we do not in general hear much of their dancing, perhaps
because on account of the infrequency of thunder, the fairy-rings are
less numerous in Ireland than elsewhere. Though the fairies steal
children and strike people with paralysis and other ailments (which is
called being _fairy-struck_), and shoot their elf-arrows at the
cattle, they are in general kind to those for whom they have
contracted a liking, and often render them essential service in time
of need. They can make themselves visible and invisible, and assume
any forms they please. The pretty tiny conical mushrooms which grow so
abundantly in Ireland are called Fairy-mushrooms; a kind of nice
regularly-formed grass is named Fairy-flax, and the bells of the
foxglove called in some places Fairy-bells, are also said to have some
connexion with the Little People.

The popular belief in Ireland also is, that the Fairies are a portion of
the fallen angels, who, being less guilty than the rest, were not driven
to hell, but were suffered to dwell on earth. They are supposed to be
very uneasy respecting their condition after the final judgement.

The only names by which they are known in those parts of Ireland in
which the English language is spoken are, Fairies, the Good
People,[428] and the Gentry, these last terms being placatory, like
the Greek Eumenides. When, for example, the peasant sees a cloud of
dust sweeping along the road, he raises his hat and says, "God speed
you, gentlemen!" for it is the popular belief that it is in these
cloudy vehicles that the Good People journey from one place to
another.[429] The Irish language has several names for the fairies;
all however are forms or derivations of the word _Shia_,[430] the
proper meaning of which seems to be Spirit. The most usual name
employed by the Munster peasantry is _Shifra_; we are not acquainted
with the fairy-belief and terminology of the inhabitants of Connemara
and the other wilds of Connaught.[431]

Most of the traits and legends of the Irish fairies are contained in
the Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland, compiled by
Mr. Crofton Croker. As we ourselves aided in that work we must inform
the reader that our contributions, both in text and notes, contain
only Leinster ideas and traditions, for that was the only province
with which we were acquainted. We must make the further confession,
that some of the more poetic traits which MM. Grimm, in the
Introduction to their translation of this work, give as characteristic
of the Irish fairies, owe their origin to the fancy of the writers,
who were, in many cases, more anxious to produce amusing tales than to
transmit legends faithfully.

The Legend of Knockshegowna (_Hill of the Fairy-calf_) the first given
in that work, relates how the fairies used to torment the cattle and
herdsmen for intruding on one of their favourite places of resort
which was on this hill. The fairy-queen, it says, having failed in her
attempts to daunt a drunken piper who had undertaken the charge of the
cattle, at last turned herself into a calf, and, with the piper on her
back, jumped over the Shannon, ten miles off, and back again. Pleased
with his courage, she agreed to abandon the hill for the future.

The Legend of Knock-Grafton tells how a little hunchback, while
sitting to rest at nightfall at the side of a Rath or Moat, heard the
fairies within singing over and over again, _Da Luan, Da Mart!_
(_i.e._, Monday, Tuesday!) and added, weary with the monotony, _Agus
da Cadin!_ (_i.e._, and Wednesday!) The fairies were so delighted with
this addition to their song that they brought him into the Moat,
entertained him, and finally freed him from the incumbrance of his
hump. Another hunchback hearing the story went to the Moat to try if
he could meet with the same good fortune. He heard the fairies singing
the amended version of the song, and, anxious to contribute, without
waiting for a pause or attending to the rhythm or melody, he added
_Agus da Hena!_ (_i.e._, and Friday.)[432] His reward was, being
carried into the Moat, and having his predecessor's hump placed on his
back in addition to his own.[433]

In the story named the Priest's Supper, a fisherman, at the request of
the fairies, asks a priest who had stopt at his house, whether they
would be saved or not at the last day. The priest desired him to tell
them to come themselves and put the question to him, but this they
declined doing, and the question remained undecided.

The next three stories are of changelings. The Young Piper, one of our
own contributions, will be found in the Appendix. The Changeling has
nothing peculiar in it; but the Brewery of Eggshells is one which we
find in many places, even in Brittany and Auvergne. In the present
version, the mother puts down eggshells to boil, and to the enquiry of
the changeling she tells him that she is brewing them, and clapping
his hands he says, "Well! I'm fifteen hundred years in the world, and
I never saw a brewery of eggshells before!"

In the Capture of Bridget Purcel, a girl is struck with a little
switch between the shoulders, by something in the form of a little
child that came suddenly behind her, and she pined away and died.

The Legend of Bottle Hill gives the origin of that name, which was as
follows. A poor man was driving his only cow to Cork to sell her. As
he was going over that hill he was suddenly joined by a
strange-looking little old man with a pale withered face and red eyes,
to whom he was eventually induced to give his cow in exchange for a
bottle, and both cow and purchaser then disappeared. When the poor man
came home he followed the directions of the stranger, and spreading a
cloth on the table, and placing the bottle on the ground, he said,
"Bottle, do your duty!" and immediately two little beings rose out of
it, and having covered the table with food in gold and silver dishes,
went down again into the bottle and vanished. By selling these he got
a good deal of money and became rich for one in his station. The
secret of his bottle however transpired, and his landlord induced him
to sell it to him. But his prosperity vanished with it, and he was
again reduced to one cow, and obliged to drive her to Cork for sale.
As he journeyed over the same hill he met the same old man, and sold
him the cow for another bottle. Having made the usual preparations, he
laid it on the ground and said, "Bottle, do your duty!" but instead of
the tiny little lads with their gold and silver dishes, there jumped
up out of it two huge fellows with cudgels, who fell to belabouring
the whole family. When they had done and were gone back into the
bottle, the owner of it, without saying a word, put it under his coat
and went to his landlord, who happened to have a great deal of company
with him, and sent in word that he was come with another bottle to
sell. He was at once admitted, the bottle did its duty, and the men
with cudgels laid about them on all present, and never ceased till the
original wealth-giving bottle was restored. He now grew richer than
ever, and his son married his landlord's daughter, but when the old
man and his wife died, the servants, it is recorded, fighting at their
wake, broke the two bottles.[434]

The Confessions of Tom Bourke, as it contains a faithful transcript of
the words and ideas of that personage, is perhaps the most valuable
portion of the work. From this we learn that in Munster the fairies are,
like the people themselves, divided into _factions_. Thus we are told
that, on the occasion of the death of Bourke's mother, the two parties
fought for three continuous nights, to decide whether she should be
buried with her own or her husband's _people_ (_i. e._ family). Bourke
also had sat for hours looking at two parties of the Good People playing
at the popular game of hurling, in a meadow at the opposite side of the
river, with their coats and waistcoats off, and white handkerchiefs on
the heads of one, and red on these of the other party.

A man whom Tom knew was returning one evening from a fair, a little
elevated of course, when he met a _berrin_ (_i. e._ funeral), which he
joined, as is the custom; but, to his surprise, there was no one there
that he knew except one man, and _he_ had been dead for some years.
When the _berrin_ was over, they gathered round a piper, and began to
dance in the churchyard. Davy longed to be among them, and the man
that he knew came up to him, and bid him take out a partner, but on no
account to give her the usual kiss. He accordingly took out the
_purtiest girl in the ring_, and danced a jig with her, to the
admiration of the whole company; but at the end he forgot the warning,
and complied with the custom of kissing one's partner. All at once
everything vanished; and when Davy awoke nest morning, he found
himself lying among the tombstones.

Another man, also a little in liquor, was returning one night from a
_berrin_. The moon was shining bright, and from the other side of the
river came the sounds of merriment, and the notes of a bagpipe. Taking
off his shoes and stockings, he waded across the river, and there he
found a great crowd of people dancing on the Inch[435] on the other
side. He mingled with them without being observed, and he longed to
join in the dance; for he had no mean opinion of his own skill. He did
so, but found that it was not to be compared to theirs, they were so
light and agile. He was going away quite in despair, when a little old
man, who was looking on with marks of displeasure in his face, came up
to him, and telling him he was his friend, and his father's friend,
bade him go into the ring and call for a lilt. He complied, and all
were amazed at his dancing; he then got a table and danced on it, and
finally he span round and round on a trencher. When he had done, they
wanted him to dance again; but he refused with a great oath, and
instantly he found himself lying on the Inch with only a white cow
grazing beside him. On going home, he got a shivering and a fever. He
was for many days out of his mind, and recovered slowly; but ever
after he had great skill in fairy matters. The dancers, it turned out,
had belonged to a different faction, and the old man who gave him his
skill to that to which he himself was attached.

In these genuine confessions it is very remarkable that the Good People
are never represented as of a diminutive size; while in every story that
we ever heard of them in Leinster, they were of pygmy stature. The
following account of their mode of entering houses in Ulster gives them
dimensions approaching to those of Titania's 'small elves.'

A Fairy, the most agile, we may suppose, of the party, is selected,
who contrives to get up to the keyhole of the door, carrying with him
a piece of thread or twine. With this he descends on the inside, where
he fastens it firmly to the floor, or some part of the furniture.
Those without then 'haul taut and belay,' and when it is fast they
prepare to march along this their perilous Es-Sirat, leading to the
paradise of pantry or parlour, in this order. First steps up the
Fairy-piper, and in measured pace pursues his adventurous route,
playing might and main an invigorating elfin-march, or other
spirit-stirring air; then one by one the rest of the train mount the
cord and follow his steps. Like the old Romans, in their triumphal
processions, they pass beneath the lofty arch of the keyhole, and move
down along the other side. Lightly, one by one, they then jump down on
the floor, to hold their revels or accomplish their thefts.

       *       *       *       *       *