
We have never heard of any being, in the parts of Ireland with which
we are acquainted, answering to the Boggart, Brownie, or Nis. A
farmer's family still, we believe, living in the county of Wicklow,
used to assert that in their grandfather's time they never had any
trouble about washing up plates and dishes; for they had only to leave
them collected in a certain part of the house for the Good People,
who would come in and wash and clean them, and in the morning
everything would be clean and in its proper place.

Yet in the county of Cork it would seem that the Cluricaun, of which we
shall presently speak, used to enact the part of Nis or Boggart. Mr.
Croker tells a story of a little being, which he calls a Cluricaun, that
haunted the cellar of a Mr. Macarthy, and in a note on this tale he
gives the contents of a letter informing him of another ycleped Little
Wildbean, that haunted the house of a Quaker gentleman named Harris, and
which is precisely the Nis or Boggart. This Wildbean, who kept to the
cellar, would, if one of the servants through negligence left the
beer-barrel running, wedge himself into the cock and stop it, till some
one came to turn it. His dinner used to be left for him in the cellar,
and the cook having, one Friday, left him nothing but part of a herring
and some cold potatoes, she was at midnight dragged out of her bed, and
down the cellar-stairs, and so much bruised that she kept her bed for
three weeks. In order at last to get rid of him, Mr. Harris resolved to
remove, being told that if he went beyond a running stream the Cluricaun
could not follow him. The last cart, filled with empty barrels and such
like, was just moving off, when from the bung-hole of one of them
Wildbean cried out, "Here, master! here we go all together!" "What!"
said Mr. Harris, "dost thou go also?" "Yes, to be sure, master. Here we
go, all together!" "In that case, friend," replied Mr. Harris, "let the
carts be unloaded; we are just as well where we are." It is added, that
"Mr. Harris died soon after, but it is said the Cluricaun still haunts
the Harris family."

In another of these Fairy Legends, Teigue of the Lee, who haunted the
house of a Mr. Pratt, in the county of Cork, bears a strong
resemblance to the Hinzelmann of Germany. To the story, which is
exceedingly well told by a member of the society of Friends, now no
more, also the narrator of the Legend of Bottle-hill, Mr. Croker has
in his notes added some curious particulars.

A being named the Fear Dearg (_i. e._ Red Man) is also known in Munster.
A tale named The Lucky Guest, which Mr. Croker gives as taken down
_verbatim_ from the mouth of the narrator by Mr. M'Clise, the artist,
gives the fullest account of this being. A girl related that, when she
was quite a child, one night, during a storm of wind and rain, a
knocking was heard at the door of her father's cabin, and a voice like
that of a feeble old man craving admission. On the door's being opened,
there came in a little old man, about two feet and a half high, with a
red sugar-loaf hat and a long scarlet coat, reaching down nearly to the
ground, his hair was long and grey, and his face yellow and wrinkled. He
went over to the fire (which the family had quitted in their fear), sat
down and dried his clothes, and began smoking a pipe which he found
there. The family went to bed, and in the morning he was gone. In about
a month after he began to come regularly every night about eleven
o'clock. The signal which he gave was thrusting a hairy arm through a
hole in the door, which was then opened, and the family retired to bed,
leaving him the room to himself. If they did not open the door, some
accident was sure to happen next day to themselves or their cattle. On
the whole, however, his visits brought good luck, and the family
prospered, till the landlord put them out of their farm, and they never
saw the Fear Dearg more.

       *       *       *       *       *

As far as our knowledge extends, there is no being in the Irish rivers
answering to the Nix or Kelpie; but on the sea coast the people
believe in beings of the same kind as the Mermen and Mermaids. The
Irish name is Merrow,[436] and legends are told of them similar to
those of other countries. Thus the Lady of Gollerus resembles the
Mermaid-wife and others which we have already related. Instead,
however, of an entire dress, it is a kind of cap, named _Cohuleen
Driuth_, without which she cannot return to her subaqueous abode.
Other legends tell of matrimonial unions formed by mortals with these
sea-ladies, from which some families in the south claim a descent. The
Lord of Dunkerron, so beautifully told in verse by Mr. Croker, relates
the unfortunate termination of a marine amour of one of the O'Sullivan
family. The Soul-cages alone contains the adventures of a Mermau.

The Irish Pooka[437] ([Irish Uncial: puca]) is plainly the English
Pouke, Puck, and would seem, like it, to denote an evil spirit. The
notions respecting it are very vague. A boy in the mountains near
Killarney told Mr. Croker that "old people used to say that the Pookas
were very numerous in the times long ago. They were wicked-minded,
black-looking, bad things, that would come in the _form of wild colts_,
with chains hanging about them. They did great hurt to benighted
travellers." Here we plainly have the English Puck; but it is remarkable
that the boy should speak of Pookas in the plural number. In Leinster,
it was always _the_, not _a_ Pooka, that we heard named. When the
blackberries begin to decay, and the seeds to appear, the children are
told not to eat them any longer, as _the_ Pooka has dirtied on them.

The celebrated fall of the Liffey, near Ballymore Eustace, is named
Pool-a-Phooka, or The Pooka's Hole. Near Macroom, in the county of Cork,
are the ruins of a castle built on a rock, named Carrig-a-Phooka, or The
Pooka's Rock. There is an old castle not far from Dublin, called Puck's
Castle, and a townland in the county of Kildare is named Puckstown. The
common expression _play the Puck_ is the same as _play the deuce_, _play
the Devil_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most remarkable of the Fairy-tribe in Ireland, and one which is
peculiar to the country, is the Leprechaun.[438] This is a being in
the form of an old man, dressed as he is described in one of the
following tales. He is by profession a maker of brogues; he resorts in
general only to secret and retired places, where he is discovered by
the sounds which he makes hammering his brogues. He is rich, like
curmudgeons of his sort, and it is only by the most violent threats
of doing him some bodily harm, that he can be made to show the place
where his treasure lies; but if the person who has caught him can be
induced (a thing that always happens, by the way) to take his eyes off
him, he vanishes, and with him the prospect of wealth. The only
instance of more than one Leprechaun being seen at a time is that
which occurs in one of the following tales, which was related by an
old woman, to the writer's sister and early companion, now no more.

Yet the Leprechaun, though, as we said, peculiar to Ireland, seems
indebted to England, at least, for his name. In Irish, as we have
seen, he is called _Lobaircin_, and it would not be easy to write the
English Lubberkin more accurately with Irish letters and Irish sounds.
Leprechaun is evidently a corruption of that word.[439] In the time of
Elizabeth and James, the word Lubrican was used in England to indicate
some kind of spirit. Thus Drayton gives as a part of Nymphidia's
invocation of Proserpina:

      By the mandrake's dreadful groans;
      By the Lubrican's sad moans;
      By the noise of dead men's bones
        In charnel-house rattling.

That this was the Leprechaun is, we think, clear; for in the Honest
Whore of Decker and Middleton, the following words are used of an
Irish footman:

      As for your Irish Lubrican, that spirit
      Whom by preposterous charms thy lust has raised.
                                                 Part II. i. 1.[440]

We thus have the Leprechaun as a well-known Irish fairy, though his
character was not understood, in the sixteenth century.

The two following tales we ourselves heard from the peasantry of
Kildare in our boyhood:[441]


