                          _The Stolen Lady._

John Roy, who lived in Glenbroun, in the parish of Abernethy, being out
one night on the hills in search of his cattle, met a troop of fairies,
who seemed to have got a prize of some sort or other. Recollecting that
the fairies are obliged to exchange whatever they may have with any one
who offers them anything, however low in value, for it, he flung his
bonnet to them, crying _Shuis slo slumus sheen_ (_i. e._, mine is yours
and yours is mine). The fairies dropped their booty, which proved to be
a Sassenach (English) lady whom the dwellers of the Shian of Coir-laggac
had carried away from her own country, leaving a stock in her place
which, of course, died and was buried. John brought her home, and she
lived for many years in his house. "It happened, however, in the course
of time," said the Gaelic narrator, "that the _new king_ found it
necessary to make the great roads through these countries by means of
soldiers, for the purpose of letting coaches and carriages pass to the
northern cities; and those soldiers had officers and commanders in the
same way as our fighting army have now. Those soldiers were never great
favourites in these countries, particularly during the time that our
kings were alive; and consequently it was no easy matter for them,
either officers or men, to procure for themselves comfortable quarters."
But John Roy would not keep up the national animosity to the _cottan
dearg_ (red-coats), and he offered a residence in his house to a _Saxon_
captain and his son. When there they could not take their eyes off the
English lady, and the son remarked to his father what a strong likeness
she bore to his deceased mother. The father replied that he too had been
struck with the resemblance, and said he could almost fancy she _was_
his wife. He then mentioned her name and those of some persons connected
with them. The lady by these words at once recognised her husband and
son, and honest John Roy had the satisfaction of reuniting the
long-separated husband and wife, and receiving their most grateful
acknowledgments.[452]

