                         MIDDLE-AGE ROMANCE.

      Ecco quei che le carte empion di sogni,
      Lancilotto, Tristano e gli altri erranti,
      Onde conven che il volgo errante agogni.
                                   PETRARCA.


Few will now endeavour to trace romantic and marvellous fiction to any
individual source. An extensive survey of the regions of fancy and their
productions will incline us rather to consider the mental powers of man
as having an uniform operation under every sky, and under every form of
political existence, and to acknowledge that identity of invention is
not more to be wondered at than identity of action. It is strange how
limited the powers of the imagination are. Without due consideration of
the subject, it might be imagined that her stores of materials and
powers of combination are boundless; yet reflection, however slight,
will convince us that here also 'there is nothing new,' and charges of
plagiarism will in the majority of cases be justly suspected to be
devoid of foundation. The finest poetical expressions and similes of
occidental literature meet us when we turn our attention to the East,
and a striking analogy pervades the tales and fictions of every region.
The reason is, the materials presented to the inventive faculties are
scanty. The power of combination is therefore limited to a narrow
compass, and similar combinations must hence frequently occur.

Yet still there is a high degree of probability in the supposition of
the luxuriant fictions of the East having through Spain and Syria
operated on European fancy. The poetry and romance of the middle ages
are notoriously richer in detail, and more gorgeous in invention, than
the more correct and chaste strains of Greece and Latium; the island
of Calypso, for example, is in beauty and variety left far behind by
the retreats of the fairies of romance. Whence arises this difference?
No doubt

      When ancient chivalry display'd
      The pomp of her heroic games,
      And crested knights and tissued dames
      Assembled at the clarion's call,
      In some proud castle's high-arch'd hall,

that a degree of pomp and splendour met the eye of the minstrel and
romancer on which the bards of the simple republics of ancient times had
never gazed, and this might account for the difference between the
poetry of ancient and of middle-age Europe. Yet, notwithstanding, we
discover such an Orientalism in the latter as would induce us to
acquiesce in the hypothesis of the fictions and the manner of the East
having been early transmitted to the West; and it is highly probable
that along with more splendid habits of life entered a more lavish use
of the gorgeous stores laid open to the plastic powers of fiction. The
tales of Arabia were undoubtedly known in Europe from a very early
period. The romance of Cleomades and Claremonde, which was written in
the thirteenth century,[51] not merely resembles, but actually is the
story of the Enchanted Horse in the Thousand and One Nights. Another
tale in the same collection, The two Sisters who envied their younger
Sister, may be found in Straparola, and is also a popular story in
Germany; and in the Pentamerone and other collections of tales published
long before the appearance of M. Galland's translation of the Eastern
ones, numerous traces of an oriental origin may be discerned. The
principal routes they came by may also be easily shown. The necessities
of commerce and the pilgrimage to Mecca occasioned a constant
intercourse between the Moors of Spain and their fellow-sectaries of the
East; and the Venetians, who were the owners of Candia, carried on an
extensive trade with Syria and Egypt. It is worthy of notice, that the
Notti Piacevoli of Straparola were first published in Venice, and that
Basile, the author of the Pentamerone, spent his youth in Candia, and
was afterwards a long time at Venice. Lastly, pilgrims were notorious
narrators of marvels, and each, as he visited the Holy Land, was anxious
to store his memory with those riches, the diffusal of which procured
him attention and hospitality at home.

We think, therefore, that European romance may be indebted, though not
for the name, yet for some of the attributes and exploits of its
fairies to Asia. This is more especially the case with the romances
composed or turned into prose in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and
sixteenth centuries; for in the earlier ones the Fairy Mythology is
much more sparingly introduced.

But beside the classic and oriental prototypes of its fairies, romance
may have had an additional one in the original mythology of the Celtic
tribes, of which a being very nearly allied to the fay of romance
appears to have formed a part. Such were the damoiselles who bestowed
their favours upon Lanval and Graelent. This subject shall, however,
be more fully considered under the head of Brittany.

Romances of chivalry, it is well known, may be divided into three
principal classes; those of Arthur and his Round Table, of Charlemagne
and his Paladins, and those of Amadis and Palmerin, and their
descendants and kindred. In the first, with the exception of Isaie le
Triste, which appears to be a work of the fifteenth century, the
fairies appear but seldom; the second exhibits them in all their
brilliancy and power; in the third, which all belong to the literature
of Spain, the name at least does not occur, but the enchantress
Urganda la Desconecida seems equal in power to La Dame du Lac, in the
romance of Lancelot du Lac.[52]

Among the incidents of the fine old romance just alluded to,[53] is
narrated the death of King Ban, occasioned by grief at the sight of
his castle taken and in flames through the treachery of his seneschal.
His afflicted queen had left her new-born infant on the margin of a
lake, while she went to soothe the last moments of the expiring
monarch. On her return, she finds her babe in the arms of a beautiful
lady. She entreats her pathetically to restore the orphan babe; but,
without heeding her entreaties, or even uttering a single word, she
moves to the edge of the lake, into which she plunges and disappears
with the child. The lady was the celebrated Dame du Lac: the child was
Lancelot, afterwards styled Du Lac. The name of the lady was Vivienne,
and she had dwelt "en la marche de la petite Bretaigne." Merlin the
demon-born, the renowned enchanter, became enamoured of her, and
taught her a portion of his art; and the ill-return she made is well
known in the annals of female treachery.[54] In consequence of the
knowledge thus acquired she became a fairy; for the author informs us
that "the damsel who carried Lancelot to the lake was a fay, and in
those times all those women were called fays who had to do with
enchantments and charms--and there were many of them then, principally
in Great Britain--and knew the power and virtues of words, of stones,
and of herbs, by which they were kept in youth and in beauty, and in
great riches, as they devised."[55]

The lake was a _feerie_, an illusion raised by the art which the devil
had taught Merlin, and Merlin the lady. The romance says: "The lady
who reared him conversed only in the forest, and dwelt on the summit
of a hill, which was much lower than that on which King Ban had died.
In this place, where it seemed that the wood was large and deep, the
lady had many fair houses, and very rich; and in the plain beneath
there was a gentle little river well-stored with fish; and this place
was so secret and so concealed, that right difficult was it for any
one to find, for the semblance of the said lake covered it so that it
could not be perceived."[56]

When her young _protégé_ had gone through his course of knightly
education, she took him to King Arthur's court, and presented him
there; and his subsequent history is well known.

In the romance of Maugis d'Aygremont et de Vivian son Frère, when
Tapinel and the female slave had stolen the two children of Duke Bevis
of Aygremont, the former sold to the wife of Sorgalant the child which
he had taken, whose name was Esclarmonde, and who was about fifteen
years of age, and was "plus belle et plus blanche qu'une fée." The
slave having laid herself to rest under a white-thorn (_aube-spine_),
was devoured by a lion and a leopard, who killed one another in their
dispute for the infant. "And the babe lay under the thorn, and cried
loudly, during which it came to pass that Oriande la Fée, who abode at
Rosefleur with four other fays, came straight to this thorn; for every
time she passed by there she used to repose under that white-thorn.
She got down, and hearing the child cry, she came that way and looked
at him, and said, 'By the god in whom we believe, this child here is
lying badly (_mal gist_), and this shall be his name;' and from that
time he was always called Maugis."

Oriande la Fée brought the child home with her and her damsels; and
having examined him, and found, by a precious ring that was in his ear,
that he was of noble lineage, "she prayed our Lord that he would be
pleased of his grace to make known his origin (_nation_)." When she had
finished her prayer, she sent for her nephew Espiet, "who was a dwarf,
and was not more than three feet high, and had his hair yellow as fine
gold, and looked like a child of seven years, but he was more than a
hundred; and he was one of the falsest knaves in the world, and knew
every kind of enchantment." Espiet informed her whose child he was; and
Oriande, having prayed to our Lord to preserve the child, took him with
her to her castle of Rosefleur, where she had him baptised and named
Maugis. She and her damsels reared him with great tenderness; and when
he was old enough she put him under the care of her brother Baudris,
"who knew all the arts of magic and necromancy, and was of the age of a
hundred years;" and he taught what he knew to Maugis.

When Maugis was grown a man, the Fay Oriande clad him in arms, and he
became her _ami_; and she loved him "de si grand amour qu'elle doute
fort qu'il ne se departe d'avecques elle."

Maugis shortly afterwards achieved the adventure of gaining the
enchanted horse Bayard, in the isle of Boucaut. Of Bayard it is said,
when Maugis spoke to him, "Bayard estoit _feyé_, si entendoit aussi
bien Maugis comme s'il (_Bayard_) eust parlé." On his return from the
island, Maugis conquers and slays the Saracen admiral Anthenor, who
had come to win the lands and castle of Oriande, and gains the sword
Flamberge (Floberge), which, together with Bayard, he afterwards gave
to his cousin Renaud.

In Perceforest, Sebille la Dame du Lac, whose castle was surrounded by
a river on which lay so dense a fog that no one could see across the
water, though not called so, was evidently a fay. The fortnight that
Alexander the Great and Floridas abode with her, to be cured of their
wounds, seemed to them but as one night. During that night, "la dame
demoura enceinte du roy dung filz, dont de ce lignage yssit le roi
Artus."[57]

In the same romance[58] we are told that "en lysle de Zellande jadis fut
demourante une _faee_ qui estoit appellee Morgane." This Morgane was
very intimate with "ung esperit (named Zephir) qui repairoit es lieux
acquatiques, mais jamais nestoit veu que de nuyt." Zephir had been in
the habit of repairing to Morgane la Faee from her youth up, "car elle
estoit malicieuse et subtille et tousjours avoit moult desire a
aucunement sçavoir des enchantemens et des conjurations." He had
committed to her charge the young Passelyon and his cousin Bennucq, to
be brought up, and Passelyon was detected in an intrigue with the young
Morgane, daughter of the fay. The various adventures of this amorous
youth form one of the most interesting portions of the romance.

In Tristan de Leonois,[59] king Meliadus, the father of Tristan, is
drawn to a chase _par mal engin et negromance_ of a fairy who was in
love with him, and carries him off, and from whose thraldom he was
only released by the power of the great enchanter Merlin.

In Parthenopex of Blois,[60] the beautiful fairy Melior, whose magic
bark carries the knight to her secret island, is daughter to the
emperor of Greece.

In no romance whatever is the fairy machinery more pleasingly
displayed than in Sir Launfal, a metrical romance, composed[61] by
Thomas Chestre, in the reign of Henry VI.

Before, however, we give the analysis of this poem, which will be
followed by that of another, and by our own imitations of this kind of
verse, we will take leave to offer some observations on a subject that
seems to us to be in general but little understood, namely, the
structure of our old English verse, and the proper mode of reading it.

Our forefathers, like their Gotho-German kindred, regulated their verse
by the number of accents, not of syllables. The foot, therefore, as we
term it, might consist of one, two, three, or even four syllables,
provided it had only one strongly marked accent. Further, the accent of
a word might be varied, chiefly by throwing it on the last syllable, as
_natúre_ for _náture_, _honoúr_ for _hónour_, etc. (the Italians, by the
way, throw it back when two accents come into collision, as, _Il Pástor
Fido_[62]); they also sounded what the French call the feminine e of
their words, as, _In oldè dayès of the King Artoúr_; and so well known
seems this practice to have been, that the copyists did not always write
this _e_, relying on the skill of the reader to supply it.[63] There was
only one restriction, namely, that it was never to come before a vowel,
unless where there was a pause. In this way the poetry of the middle
ages was just as regular as that of the present day; and Chaucer, when
properly read, is fully as harmonious as Pope. But the editors of our
ancient poems, with the exception of Tyrwhitt, seem to have been
ignorant or regardless of this principle; and in the Canterbury Tales
alone is the verse properly arranged.

We will now proceed to the analysis of the romance of Sir Launfal.

Sir Launfal was one of the knights of Arthur, who loved him well, and
made him his steward. But when Arthur married the beautiful but frail
Gwennere, daughter of Ryon, king of Ireland, Launfal and other
virtuous knights manifested their dissatisfaction when she came to
court. The queen was aware of this, and, at the first entertainment
given by the king,

        The queen yaf (_gave_) giftès for the nones,
        Gold and silver, precious stones,
        Her courtesy to kythe (_show_):
      Everiche knight she yaf broche other (_or_) ring,
      But Sir Launfal she yaf no thing,
        That grieved him many a sythe (_time_).

Launfal, under the feigned pretext of the illness of his father, takes
leave of the king, and retires to Karlyoun, where he lives in great
poverty. Having obtained the loan of a horse, one holyday, he rode into
a fair forest, where, overcome by the heat, he lay down under the shade
of a tree, and meditated on his wretched state. In this situation he is
attracted by the approach of two fair damsels splendidly arrayed.

      Their faces were white as snow on down,
      Their rode[64] was red, their eyne were brown;
        I saw never none swiche.
      That one bare of gold a basín,
      That other a towel white and fine,
        Of silk that was good and riche;
      Their kerchevès were welè skire (_clear_)
      Araid (_striped_) with richè goldè wire--
        Launfal began to siche--
      They comè to him over the hoth (_heath_),
      He was curteís, and against them goeth,
        And greet them mildeliche.

They greet him courteously in return, and invite him to visit their
mistress, whose pavilion is at hand. Sir Launfal complies with the
invitation, and they proceed to where the pavilion lies. Nothing could
exceed this pavilion in magnificence. It was surmounted by an _erne_
or eagle, adorned with precious stones so rich, that the poet
declares, and we believe, that neither Alexander nor Arthur possessed
"none swiche jewel."

      He foundè in the paviloun
      The kingès daughter of Oliroun,
        Dame Tryamour that hight;
      Her father was king of Faërie,
      Of occientè[65] fer and nigh,
        A man of mickle might.

The beauty of dame Tryamour was beyond conception.

      For heat her cloathès down she dede
      Almostè to her girdle stede (_place_),
        Than lay she uncover't;
      She was as white as lily in May,
      Or snow that snoweth in winter's day:
        He seigh (_saw_) never none so pert (_lively_).

      The redè rose, when she is new,
      Against her rode was naught of hew
        I dare well say in cert;
      Her hairè shone as goldè wire:
      May no man redè her attire,
        Ne naught well think in hert (_heart_).

This lovely dame bestows her heart on Sir Launfal, on condition of his
fidelity. As marks of her affection, she gives him a never-failing
purse and many other valuable presents, and dismisses him next morning
with the assurance, that whenever he wished to see her, his wish would
be gratified on withdrawing into a private room, where she would
instantly be with him. This information is accompanied with a charge
of profound secrecy on the subject of their loves.

The knight returns to court, and astonishes every one by his riches
and his munificence. He continues happy in the love of the fair
Tryamour, until an untoward adventure interrupts his bliss. One day
the queen beholds him dancing, with other knights, before her tower,
and, inspired with a sudden affection, makes amorous advances to the
knight. These passages of love are received on his part with an
indignant repulse, accompanied by a declaration more enthusiastic than
politic or courteous, that his heart was given to a dame, the foulest
of whose maidens surpassed the queen in beauty. The offence thus given
naturally effected an entire conversion in the queen's sentiments;
and, when Arthur returned from hunting, like Potiphar's wife, she
charges Launfal with attempting her honour. The charge is credited,
and the unhappy knight condemned to be burned alive, unless he shall,
against a certain day, produce that peerless beauty. The fatal day
arrives; the queen is urgent for the execution of the sentence, when
ten fair damsels, splendidly arrayed, and mounted on white palfreys,
are descried advancing toward the palace. They announce the approach
of their mistress, who soon appears, and by her beauty justifies the
assertion of her knight. Sir Launfal is instantly set at liberty, and,
vaulting on the courser his mistress had bestowed on him, and which
was held at hand by his squire, he follows her out of the town.

      The lady rode down Cardevile,
      Fer into a jolif ile,
        Oliroun that hight;[66]
      Every year upon a certain day,
      Men may heare Launfales steedè neighe,
        And him see with sight.
      He that will there axsy (_ask_) justes
      To keep his armès fro the rustes,
        In turnement other (_or_) fight,
      Dar (_need_) he never further gon;
      There he may find justès anon,
        With Sir Launfal the knight.
      Thus Launful, withouten fable,
      That noble knight of the roundè table,
        Was taken into the faërie;
      Since saw him in this land no man,
      Ne no more of him tell I ne can,
        For soothè, without lie.[67]

No romance is of more importance to the present subject than the
charming Huon de Bordeaux.[68] Generally known, as the story should
be, through Wieland's poem and Mr. Sotheby's translation, we trust
that we shall be excused for giving some passages from the original
French romance, as Le petit roy Oberon appears to form a kind of
connecting link between the fairies of romance and the Elves or Dwarfs
of the Teutonic nations. When we come to Germany it will be our
endeavour to show how the older part of Huon de Bordeaux has been
taken from the story of Otnit in the Heldenbuch, where the dwarf king
Elberich performs nearly the same services to Otnit that Oberon does
to Huon, and that, in fact, the name Oberon is only Elberich slightly
altered.[69]

Huon, our readers must know, encounters in Syria an old follower of his
family named Gerasmes; and when consulting with him on the way to
Babylon he is informed by him that there are two roads to that city, the
one long and safe, the other short and dangerous, leading through a
wood, "which is sixteen leagues long, but is so full of Fairie and
strange things that few people pass there without being lost or stopt,
because therewithin dwelleth a king, Oberon the Fay. He is but three
feet in height; he is all humpy; but he hath an angelic face; there is
no mortal man who should see him who would not take pleasure in looking
at him, he hath so fair a face. Now you will hardly have entered the
wood, if you are minded to pass that way, when he will find how to speak
to you, but of a surety if you speak to him, you are lost for evermore,
without ever returning; nor will it lie in you, for if you pass through
the wood, whether straightforwards or across it, you will always find
him before you, and it will be impossible for you to escape at all
without speaking to him, for his words are so pleasant to hear, that
there is no living man who can escape him. And if so be that he should
see that you are nowise inclined to speak to him, he will be passing
wroth with you. For before you have left the wood he will cause it so to
rain on you, to blow, to hail, and to make such right marvellous storms,
thunder and lightning, that you will think the world is going to end.
Then you will think that you see a great flowing river before you,
wondrously black and deep; but know, sire, that right easily will you be
able to go through it without wetting the feet of your horse, for it is
nothing but a phantom and enchantments that the dwarf will make for you,
because he wishes to have you with him, and if it so be that you keep
firm to your resolve, not to speak to him, you will be surely able to
escape," etc.[70]

Huon for some time followed the sage advice of Gerasmes, and avoided
Oberon le fayé. The storms of rain and thunder came on as predicted,
the magic horn set them all dancing, and at last the knight determined
to await and accost the dwarf.

"The Dwarf Fay came riding through the wood, and was clad in a robe so
exceeding fine and rich, that it would be a marvel to relate it for
the great and marvellous riches that were upon it; for so much was
there of precious stones, that the great lustre that they cast was
like unto the sun when he shineth full clear. And therewithal he bare
a right fair bow in his fist, so rich that no one could value it, so
fine it was; and the arrow that he bare was of such sort and manner,
that there was no beast in the world that he wished to have, that it
did not stop at that arrow. He had at his neck a rich horn, which was
hung by two rich strings of fine gold."[71]

This horn was wrought by four Fairies, who had endowed it with its
marvellous properties.

Oberon, on bringing Huon to speech, informed him that he was the son of
Julius Cæsar, and the lady of the Hidden Island, afterwards called
Cephalonia. This lady's first love had been Florimont of Albania, a
charming young prince, but being obliged to part from him, she married,
and had a son named Neptanebus, afterwards King of Egypt, who begot
Alexander the Great, who afterwards put him to death. Seven hundred
years later, Cæsar, on his way to Thessaly, was entertained in
Cephalonia by the lady of the isle, and he loved her, for she told him
he would defeat Pompey, and he became the father of Oberon. Many a noble
prince and noble fairy were at the birth, but one Fairy was unhappily
not invited, and the gift she gave was that he should not grow after his
third year, but repenting, she gave him to be the most beautiful of
nature's works. Other Fairies gave him the gift of penetrating the
thoughts of men, and of transporting himself and others from place to
place by a wish; and the faculty, by like easy means, of raising and
removing castles, palaces, gardens, banquets, and such like. He further
informed the knight, that he was king and lord of Mommur; and that when
he should leave this world his seat was prepared in Paradise--for
Oberon, like his prototype Elberich, was a veritable Christian.

When after a variety of adventures Oberon comes to Bordeaux to the aid
of Huon, and effects a reconciliation between him and Charlemagne, he
tells Huon that the time is at hand that he should leave this world
and take the seat prepared for him in Paradise, "en faerie ne veux
plus demeurer." He directs him to appear before him within four years
in his city of Mommur, where he will crown him as his successor.

Here the story properly ends, but an addition of considerable magnitude
has been made by a later hand, in which the story is carried on.

Many are the perils which Huon encounters before the period appointed
by Oberon arrives. At length, however, he and the fair Esclairmonde
(the Rezia of Wieland) come to Mommur. Here, in despite of Arthur
(who, with his sister Morgue la faée and a large train, arrives at
court, and sets himself in opposition to the will of the monarch, but
is reduced to order by Oberon's threat of turning him into a _Luyton
de Mer_[72]), Huon is crowned king of all Faerie "tant du pais des
Luytons comme des autres choses secretes reservées dire aux hommes."
Arthur gets the kingdom of Bouquant, and that which Sybilla held of
Oberon, and all the Faeries that were in the plains of Tartary. The
good king Oberon then gave Huon his last instructions, recommending
his officers and servants to him, and charging him to build an abbey
before the city, in the mead which the dwarf had loved, and there to
bury him. Then, falling asleep in death, a glorious troop of angels,
scattering odours as they flew, conveyed his soul to Paradise.

Isaie le Triste is probably one of the latest romances, certainly
posterior to Huon de Bordeaux, for the witty but deformed dwarf Tronc,
who is so important a personage in it, is, we are told, Oberon, whom
Destiny compelled to spend a certain period in that form. And we
shall, as we have promised, prove Oberon to be the handsome dwarf-king
Elberich. In Isaie the Faery ladies approach to the Fées of Perrault,
and Madame D'Aulnoy. Here, as at the birth of Oberon and of Ogier le
Danois, they interest themselves for the new-born child, and bestow
their gifts upon it. The description in this romance of the manner in
which the old hermit sees them occupied about the infant Isaie is very
pleasing. It was most probably Fairies of this kind, and not the
diminutive Elves, that Milton had in view when writing these lines:

      Good luck betide thee, son, for, at thy birth,
      The Faery ladies danced upon the hearth.
      Thy drowsy nurse hath sworn she did them spy
      Come tripping to the room where thou didst lie,
      And, sweetly singing round about thy bed,
      Strew all their blessings on thy sleeping head.


The description of the Vergier des Fées in Isaie le Triste, and of the
beautiful valley in which it was situated, may rival in richness and
luxuriancy similar descriptions in Spenser and the Italian poets.[73]

We have now, we trust, abundantly proved our position of the Fairies
of romance being, at least at the commencement, only 'human mortals,'
endowed with superhuman powers, though we may perceive that, as the
knowledge of Oriental fiction increased, the Fairies began more and
more to assume the character of a distinct species. Our position will
acquire additional strength when in the course of our inquiry we
arrive at France and Italy.

Closely connected with the Fairies is the place of their abode, the
region to which they convey the mortals whom they love, 'the happy
lond of Faery.'
