                         _Tale of Elidurus._

A short time before our days, a circumstance worthy of note occurred
in these parts, which Elidurus, a priest, most strenuously affirmed
had befallen himself. When he was a youth of twelve years,--since, as
Solomon says, "The root of learning is bitter, although the fruit is
sweet,"--and was following his literary pursuits, in order to avoid
the discipline and frequent stripes inflicted on him by his preceptor,
he ran away, and concealed himself under the hollow bank of a river;
and, after fasting in that situation for two days, two little men of
pygmy stature appeared to him, saying, "If you will come with us, we
will lead you into a country full of delights and sports." Assenting,
and rising up, he followed his guides through a path, at first
subterraneous and dark, into a most beautiful country, adorned with
rivers and meadows, woods and plains, but obscure, and not illuminated
with the full light of the sun. All the days were cloudy, and the
nights extremely dark, on account of the absence of the moon and
stars. The boy was brought before the king, and introduced to him in
the presence of the court; when, having examined him for a long time,
he delivered him to his son, who was then a boy. These men were of the
smallest stature, but very well proportioned for their size. They were
all fair-haired, with luxuriant hair falling over their shoulders,
like that of women. They had horses proportioned to themselves, of the
size of greyhounds. They neither ate flesh nor fish, but lived on milk
diet, made up into messes with saffron. They never took an oath, for
they detested nothing so much as lies. As often as they returned from
our upper hemisphere, they reprobated our ambition, infidelities, and
inconstancies. They had no religious worship, being only, as it seems,
strict lovers and reverers of truth.

The boy frequently returned to our hemisphere, sometimes by the way he
had first gone, sometimes by another; at first in company with others,
and afterwards alone, and confided his secret only to his mother,
declaring to her the manners, nature, and state of that people. Being
desired by her to bring a present of gold, with which that region
abounded, he stole, while at play with the king's son, the golden ball
with which he used to divert himself, and brought it to his mother in
great haste; and when he reached the door of his father's house, but
not unpursued, and was entering it in a great hurry, his foot stumbled
on the threshold, and, falling down into the room where his mother was
sitting, the two Pygmies seized the ball, which had dropped from his
hand, and departed, spitting at and deriding the boy. On recovering
from his fall, confounded with shame, and execrating the evil counsel
of his mother, he returned by the usual track to the subterraneous
road, but found no appearance of any passage, though he searched for
it on the banks of the river for nearly the space of a year. Having
been brought back by his friends and mother, and restored to his right
way of thinking and his literary pursuits, he attained in process of
time the rank of priesthood. Whenever David the Second, bishop of St.
David's, talked to him in his advanced state of life concerning this
event, he could never relate the particulars without shedding tears.

He had also a knowledge of the language of that nation, and used to
recite words of it he had readily acquired in his younger days. These
words, which the bishop often repeated to me, were very conformable to
the Greek idiom. When they asked for water, they said, _Udor udorum_,
which signifies "Bring water;" for Udor, in their language, as well as
in the Greek, signifies water; and Dwr also, in the British language,
signifies water. When they want salt, they say, _Halgein udorum_,
"Bring salt." Salt is called [Greek: hals] in Greek, and Halen in
British; for that language, from the length of time which the Britons
(then called Trojans, and afterwards Britons from Brito, their leader)
remained in Greece after the destruction of Troy, became, in many
instances, similar to the Greek.[459]
