                       _The Spirit of the Van._

Among the mountains of Carmarthen, lies a beautiful and romantic piece
of water, named The Van Pools. Tradition relates, that after midnight,
on New Tear's Eve, there appears on this lake a being named The Spirit
of the Van. She is dressed in a white robe, bound by a golden girdle;
her hair is long and golden, her face is pale and melancholy; she sits
in a golden boat, and manages a golden oar.

Many years ago there lived in the vicinity of this lake a young
farmer, who having heard much of the beauty of this spirit, conceived
a most ardent desire to behold her, and be satisfied of the truth. On
the last night of the year, he therefore went to the edge of the lake,
which lay calm and bright beneath the rays of the full moon, and
waited anxiously for the first hour of the New Year. It came, and then
he beheld the object of his wishes gracefully guiding her golden
gondola to and fro over the lake. The moon at length sank behind the
mountains, the stars grew dim at the approach of dawn, and the fair
spirit was on the point of vanishing, when, unable to restrain
himself, he called aloud to her to stay and be his wife; but with a
faint cry she faded from his view. Night after night he now might be
seen pacing the shores of the lake, but all in vain. His farm was
neglected, his person wasted away, and gloom and melancholy were
impressed on his features. At length he confided his secret to one of
the mountain-sages, whose counsel was--a Welsh one, by the way--to
assail the fair spirit with gifts of cheese and bread! The counsel was
followed; and on Midsummer Eve the enamoured swain went down to the
lake, and let fall into it a large cheese and a loaf of bread. But all
was vain; no spirit rose. Still he fancied that the spot where he had
last seen her shone with more than wonted brightness, and that a
musical sound vibrated among the rocks. Encouraged by these signs, he
night after night threw in loaves and cheeses, but still no spirit
came. At length New Year's Eve returned. He dressed himself in his
best, took his largest cheese and seven of his whitest loaves, and
repaired to the lake. At the turn of midnight, he dropped them slowly
one by one into the water, and then remained in silent expectation.
The moon was hid behind a cloud, but by the faint light she gave, he
saw the magic skiff appear, and direct its course for where he stood.
Its owner stepped ashore, and hearkened to the young man's vows, and
consented to become his wife. She brought with her as her dower flocks
and herds, and other rural wealth. One charge she gave him, never to
strike her, for the third time he should do so she would vanish.

They married, and were happy. After three or four years they were
invited to a christening, and to the surprise of all present, in the
midst of the ceremony, the spirit burst into tears. Her husband gave
an angry glance, and asked her why she thus made a fool of herself?
She replied, "The poor babe is entering in a world of sin and sorrow,
and misery lies before it; why should I rejoice?" He gave her a push.
She warned him that he had struck her once. Again they were, after
some time, invited to attend the funeral of that very child. The
spirit now laughed, and danced, and sang. Her husband's wrath was
excited, and he asked her why she thus made a fool of herself? "The
babe," she said, "has left a world of sin and sorrow, and escaped the
misery that was before it, and is gone to be good and happy for ever
and ever. Why, then, should I weep?" He gave her a push from him, and
again she warned him. Still they lived happily as before. At length
they were invited to a wedding, where the bride was young and fair,
the husband a withered old miser. In the midst of the festivity, the
spirit burst into a copious flood of tears, and to her husband's angry
demand of why she thus made a fool of herself, she replied in the
hearing of all, "Because summer and winter cannot agree. Youth is
wedded to age for paltry gold. I see misery here, and tenfold misery
hereafter, to be the lot of both. It is the devil's compact."
Forgetful of her warnings, the husband now thrust her from him with
real anger. She looked at him tenderly and reproachfully, and said,
"You have struck me for the third and last time. Farewell!"

So saying, she left the place. He rushed out after her, and just
reached his home in time to see her speeding to the lake, followed by
all her flocks and herds. He pursued her, but in vain; his eyes never
more beheld her.[463]
