
As far as we have been able to learn, the belief in Fairies is
confined in Wales to the southern counties of Glamorgan, Carmarthen,
and Pembroke, the parts into which the Saxons had penetrated farthest,
and where they of course had exercised most influence. In these
counties the popular belief in these beings is by no means yet
extinct, and their attributes in the creed of the Welsh peasants are
similar to those of their British and Irish kindred.

The usual name given to the fairies in these parts of Wales, is Y Dynon
Bach Têg, i. e. _The Little Fair People_. Ellyll, in the plural
Ellyllon, also signifies an Elf, from which word, indeed, it may have
been derived. The bells of the Digitalis or fox-glove are called Menyg
Ellylon, or the Elves'-gloves; in Ireland, also, they are connected with
the fairies. The toadstools or poisonous mushrooms are named Bwyd
Ellyllon, or Elves'-food. Perhaps, however, it is not the large ugly
toadstools that are so named, but those pretty small delicate fungi,
with their conical heads, which are named Fairy-mushrooms in Ireland,
where they grow so plentifully. Finally, there was formerly in the park
of Sir Robert Vaughan a celebrated old oak-tree, named Crwben-yr-Ellyll,
or The Elf's Hollow-tree. The popular belief respecting these Ellyllon
is, that they are the souls of the ancient Druids, who, being too good
for relegation to Hell, and too evil for re-admittance to Heaven, are
permitted to wander among men upon earth till the last day, when they
also will enter on a higher state of being.[464]

       *       *       *       *       *

The legends of which we will now proceed to give a specimen, were
collected and published in the latter half of the eighteenth century,
by a Welsh clergyman, who seems to have entertained no doubt whatever
of the truth of the adventures contained in them.[465]

The two daughters of a respectable farmer in the parish of Bedwellty
were one day out hay-making with their man and maid servant and a
couple of their neighbours, when on a hill, about quarter of a mile
distant, they saw a large flock of sheep. Soon after, they saw them
going up to a place half a mile off, and then going out of their sight
as if they vanished in the air. About half-an-hour before sunset, they
saw them again, but not all alike; for some saw them like sheep, some
like greyhounds, some like swine, and some like naked infants. They
appeared in the shade of the mountain between them and the sun, and
the first sight was as if they rose out of the earth. "This was a
notable appearance of the fairies, seen by credible witnesses. The
sons of infidelity are very unreasonable not to believe the
testimonies of so many witnesses of the being of spirits."

E. T. going home by night over Bedwellty Mountains, saw the fairies on
each side of him. Some of them were dancing. He also heard the sound
of a bugle-horn, as if people were hunting. He began to grow afraid,
but recollecting to have heard that if, on seeing the fairies, you
draw out your knife, they will vanish, he did so, and saw them no
more. "This the old gentleman sincerely related to me. He was a sober
man, and of the strictest veracity."

A young man having gone early one morning to a barn to feed oxen, when
he had done, lay down on the hay to rest. As he lay he heard the sound
of music approaching the barn, and presently came in a large company,
wearing striped clothes (some more gay than others), and commenced
dancing to their music. He lay quite still, thinking to escape their
notice; but a woman, better dressed than the others, came up to him
with a striped cushion, with a tassel at each corner, and put it under
his head. Some time after, a cock was heard to crow, which seemed
either to surprise or displease them, and they hastily drew the
cushion from under his head, and went away.

P. W., "an honest virtuous woman," related that one time, when she was
a little girl on her way to school, she saw the fairies dancing under
a crab-tree. As they appeared to be children of her own size, and had
small pleasant music, she went and joined in their exercise, and then
took them to dance in an empty barn. This she continued to do for
three or four years. As she never could hear the sound of their feet,
she always took off her shoes, supposing noise to be displeasing to
them. They were of small stature, looked rather old, and wore blue and
green aprons. Her grandfather, who kept school in the parish-church,
used, when going home from it late in the evening, to see the fairies
dancing under an oak, within two or three fields of the church.

The learned writer gives finally a letter to himself, from a "pious
young gentleman" of Denbighshire, dated March 24, 1772, in which he
informs him, that about fifteen years before, as himself, his sister,
and two other little girls were playing at noon of a summer's day in a
field, they saw a company of dancers, about seventy yards from them.
Owing to the rapidity of their whirling motions, they could not count
them, but guessed them at fifteen or sixteen. They were in red, like
soldiers, with red handkerchiefs spotted with yellow, on their heads.
As they were gazing and wondering at them, one of the dancers came
running towards them. The children, in a fright, made for an adjacent
stile. The girls got over, but the boy was near being caught, and on
looking back when over, he saw the red man stretching his arms after
him over the stile, which it would seem he had not the power to cross.
When they came to the house, which was close at hand, they gave the
alarm, and people went out to search the fields, but could see
nothing. The little man was very grim-looking, with a copper-coloured
face. His running-pace was rather slow, but he took great strides for
one of his size.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following legends were collected in 1827, in the Vale of Neath, in
Glamorganshire, by a lady with whom we became acquainted when
travelling through North Wales, in the preceding autumn.[466]

An old woman assured our fair friend, that she one time, many years
before, saw the fairies to the number of some hundreds. They were very
small, were mounted on little white horses, not bigger than dogs, and
rode four a-breast. It was almost dusk at the time, and they were not a
quarter of a mile from her. Another old woman said that her father had
often seen the fairies riding in the air on little white horses, but he
never saw them come down on the ground. He also used to hear their music
in the air. She had heard, too, of a man who had been five-and-twenty
years with the fairies, and thought he had been away only five minutes.

