                                CHAUCER.


Brittany, the ancient Armorica, retains perhaps as unmixed a
population as any part of Western Europe. Its language has been,
however, like the Welsh and the Celtic dialects, greatly affected by
the Latin and Teutonic. The ancient intercourse kept up with Wales and
Cornwall by the Bretons, who were in a great measure colonists from
these parts of Britain, caused the traditions and poetry of the latter
to be current and familiar in Little Britain, as that country was then
called. To poetry and music, indeed, the whole Celto-Cymric race seem
to have been strongly addicted; and, independently of the materials
which Brittany may have supplied for the history of Geoffrey of
Monmouth, many other true or romantic adventures were narrated by the
Breton poets in their Lais. Several of these Lais were translated into
French verse in the thirteenth century by a poetess named Marie de
France, resident at the court of the English monarchs of the house of
Plantagenet, to one of whom, probably Henry the Third, her Lais are
dedicated.[469] This circumstance may account for the Lais being
better known in England than in France. The only manuscript containing
any number of them is in the Harleian Library; for those of France
contain but five Lais. The Lai du Fresne was translated into English;
and from the Lai de Lanval and Lai de Graelent--which last by the way
is not in the Harleian Collection--Chestre made his Launfal Miles, or
Sir Launfal. Chaucer perhaps took the concluding circumstance of his
Dream from the Lai de Eliduc.

In some of these Lais we meet with what may be regarded as Fairy
machinery. The word Fée, indeed, occurs only once;[470] but in the
Lais de Gugemer, de Lanval, d'Ywenec, and de Graelent, personages are
to be met with differing in nothing from the Fays of Romance, and who,
like them, appear to be human beings endowed with superior powers.

The origin of the Breton Korrigan, as they are called, has been
sought, and not improbably, in the Gallicenæ[471] or ancient Gaul, of
whom Pomponius Mela thus writes:--"Sena,[472] in the British sea,
opposite the Ofismician coast, is remarkable for an oracle of the
Gallic God. Its priestesses, holy in perpetual virginity, are said to
be _nine_ in number. They are called Gallicenæ, and are thought to be
endowed with singular powers, so as to raise by their charms the winds
and seas, _to turn themselves into what animals they will_, to cure
wounds and diseases incurable by others, to know and predict the
future; but this they do only to navigators who go thither purposely
to consult them."[473]

We have here certainly all the attributes of the Damoiselles of the
Lais of Marie de France. The doe whom Gugemer wounds speaks with a
human voice. The lady who loved Lanval took him away into an island,
and Graelent and his mistress crossed a deep and broad river to arrive
at her country, which perhaps was also an island in the original
Breton Lai. The part most difficult of explanation is the secret
manner in which these dames used to visit their lovers; but perhaps
the key is to be found in the Lai d'Ywenec, of which, chiefly on that
account, we give an analysis. The hero of that Lai differs not in
point of power from these ladies, and as he is a real man, with the
power of assuming at will the shape of a bird, so it is likely they
were real women, and that it was in the bird-shape they entered the
chambers of their lovers. Graelent's mistress says to him,[474]

      I shall love you trewely;
      But one thing I forbid straitlý,
      You must not utter a word apérte
      Which might our love make discovérte.
      I will give unto you richlý,
      Gold and silver, clothes, and fee.
      Much love shall be between us two--
      Night and day I'll go to you:
      You'll see me come to you alwáy--
      With me laugh and talk you may.
      You shall no comrade have to see,
      Or who shall know my privacy,
