
Such is the result of our inquiries respecting the Fairy system of
the "oldè gentil Bretons." Owing to the praiseworthy labours of a
Breton gentleman of the present day,[485] we are enabled to give the
following account of it as it actually prevails in Brittany.

Our author divides the Breton fairies into two classes,--the Fays
(_Fées_) and the Dwarfs (_Nains_); of which the Breton name seems to be
Korrig or Korrigan, and Korr or Korred.[486] The former he identifies,
as we have seen, very plausibly, with the Gallicenæ of Mela; for he says
that the ancient Welsh bards declare that they reverenced a being of the
female sex named Korid-gwen, _i. e._ Korid-woman, to whom they assigned
_nine_ virgins as attendants. To this being Taliesin gives a magic vase,
the edges of which are adorned with pearl, and it contains the wondrous
water of bardic genius and of universal knowledge.

The Korrigan, our authority further states, can predict the future,
assume any form they please, move from place to place with the
rapidity of thought, cure maladies by the aid of charms which they
communicate to their favourites. Their size is said not to exceed two
feet, but their proportions are most exact; and they have long flowing
hair, which they comb out with great care. Their only dress is a long
white veil, which they wind round their body. Seen at night, or in the
dusk of the evening, their beauty is great; but in the daylight their
eyes appear red, their hair white, and their faces wrinkled; hence
they rarely let themselves be seen by day. They are fond of music, and
have fine voices, but are not much given to dancing. Their favourite
haunts are the springs, by which they sit and comb their hair. They
are said to celebrate there every returning spring a great nocturnal
festival. On the sod at its brink is spread a table-cloth white as the
driven snow, covered with the most delicious viands. In the centre is
a crystal cup, which emits such light that there is no need of lamps.
At the end of the banquet a cup goes round filled with a liquor, one
drop of which would make one as wise as God himself. At the approach
of a mortal the whole vanishes.

Like fairies in general the Korrigan steal children, against which the
remedy usually employed is, to place the child under the protection of
the Virgin, by putting a rosary or a scapulary about its neck. They
are also fond of uniting themselves with handsome young men to
regenerate, as the peasants say, their accursed race. The general
belief respecting them is, that they were great princesses who, having
refused to embrace Christianity when it was preached in Armorica by
the Apostles, were struck by the curse of God. Hence it is that they
are said to be animated by a violent hatred of religion and the
clergy. The sight of a _soutane_, or the sound of a bell, puts them to
flight; but the object of greatest abhorrence to them is the Holy
Virgin. The last trait to be noticed of these beings is, that, like
similar beings in other countries, their breath is deadly.

The reader must have observed the strong resemblance which the Korrigan
bear to the Elle-maids of Scandinavia. In like manner the Korred are
very similar to the Trolls.[487] These are usually represented as short
and stumpy with shaggy hair, dark wrinkled faces, little deep-set eyes,
but bright as carbuncles. Their voice is cracked and hollow: their hands
have claws like a cat's; their feet are horny like those of a goat. They
are expert smiths and coiners; they are said to have great treasures in
the _dolmen_[488] in which they dwell, and of which they are regarded as
the builders. They dance around them by night, and wo to the belated
peasant who, passing by, is forced to join in their roundel; he usually
dies of exhaustion. Wednesday is their holiday; the first Wednesday in
May their annual festival, which they celebrate with dancing, singing,
and music. They have the same aversion to holy things as the Korrigan;
like them, too, they can fortell events to come. The Korrid is always
furnished with a large leathern purse, which is said to be full of gold;
but if any one succeeds in getting it from him, he finds nothing in it
but hair and a pair of scissors.

The Bretons also believe in Mermaids; they name them Morgan
(_sea-women_) and Morverc'h (_sea-daughters_), and say that they draw
down to their palaces of gold and crystal at the bottom of the sea or
of ponds, those who venture imprudently too near the edge of the
water. Like the mermaids they sing and comb their golden hair. In one
of the ballads we read, "Fisher, hast thou seen the mermaid combing
her hair, yellow as gold, by the noontide sun, at the edge of the
water?" "I have seen the fair mermaid. I have also heard her singing;
her songs were plaintive as the waves."[489]

In M. Villemarqué's collection there are three ballads relating to the
Korrigan and Korred. The following is a faithful translation of the
first of them in the exact measure of the original. All the Breton
poetry is rimed, very frequently in triads or tercets.

