                 _The Dance and Song of the Korred._

The valley of Goel was a celebrated haunt of the Korred.[492] It was
thought dangerous to pass through it at night lest one should be forced
to join in their dances, and thus perhaps lose his life. One evening,
however, a peasant and his wife thoughtlessly did so, and they soon
found themselves enveloped by the dancing sprites, who kept singing--

        Lez y, Lez hon,
      Bas an arer zo gant hon;
        Lez on, Lez y,
      Bas an arer zo gant y.

        Let him go, let him go,
      For he has the wand of the plough;
        Let her go, let her go,
      For she has the wand of the plough.

It seems the man had in his hand the _fourche_, or short stick, which
is used as a plough-paddle in Brittany, and this was a protection, for
the dancers made way for them to go out of the ring.

When this became known, many persons having fortified themselves with
a _fourche_, gratified their curiosity by witnessing the dance of the
Korred. Among the rest were two tailors, Peric and Jean, who, being
merry fellows, dared each other to join in the dance. They drew lots,
and the lot fell upon Peric, a humpbacked red-haired, but bold stout
little fellow. He went up to the Korred and asked permission to take
share in their dance. They granted it, and all went whirling round and
round, singing

      Dilun, Dimeurs, Dimerc'her.

      Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.

Peric, weary of the monotony, when there was a slight pause at the
last word, added

      Ha Diriaou, ha Digwener.

      And Thursday and Friday.

_Mat! mat!_ (good! good!) cried they, and gathering round him, they
offered him his choice of beauty, rank, or riches. He laughed, and
only asked them to remove his hump and change the colour of his hair.
They forthwith took hold of him and tossed him up into the air,
throwing him from hand to hand till at last he lighted on his feet
with a flat back and fine long black hair.

When Jean saw and heard of the change he resolved to try what _he_
could get from the potent Korred, so a few evenings after he went and
was admitted to the dance, which now went to the words as enlarged by
Peric. To make his addition he shouted out,

      Ha Disadarn, ha Disul.

      And Saturday and Sunday.

"What more? what more?" cried the Korred, but he only went on
repeating the words. They then asked him what he would have, and he
replied riches. They tossed him up, and kept bandying him about till
he cried for mercy, and on coming to the ground, he found he had got
Peric's hump and red hair.

It seems that the Korred were condemned to this continual dancing,
which was never to cease till a mortal should join in their dance, and
after naming all the days of the week, should add, _Ha cetu chu er
sizun_, "And now the week is ended." They punished Jean for coming so
near the end and then disappointing them.[493]

       *       *       *       *       *