
The next lay, which is entirely composed in tercets, is the story of a
changeling. In order to recover her own child the mother is advised by
the Virgin, to whom she has prayed, to prepare a meal for ten
farm-servants in an egg-shell, which will make the Korrid speak, and
she is then to whip him well till he cries, and when he does so he
will be taken away. The woman does as directed: the Korr asks what she
is about: she tells him: "For ten, dear mother, in an eggshell! I have
seen the egg before I saw the white hen. I have seen the acorn before
I saw the tree: I have seen the acorn and I have seen the shoot: I
have seen the oak in the wood of Brézal, but never saw I such a thing
as this." "Thou hast seen too many things, my son," replied she, and
began to whip him, when one came crying, "Don't beat him, give him
back to me; I have not done yours any injury. He is king in our
country." When the woman went home she found her own child sleeping
sweetly in the cradle. He opened his eyes and said, "Ah! mother, I
have been a long time asleep!"

Among the Welsh legends above related, that of the Fairies Banished
has some resemblance to this; but M. Villemarqué says that he was told
a changeling-story by the Glamorgan peasantry, precisely the same as
the Breton legend. In it the changeling is heard muttering to himself
in a cracked voice, "I have seen the acorn before I saw the oak: I
have seen the egg before I saw the white hen: I have never seen the
like of this." It is remarkable that these words form a rimed triad or
tercet nearly the same with that in the Breton ballad,[490] whence M.
Villemarqué is led to suspect that the legend is anterior to the
seventh century, the epoch of the separation of the Britons of Wales
and Armorica. But as changelings seem to have come from the North, we
cannot consent to receive this theory. He also quotes from Geoffrey of
Monmouth's Life of Merlin, "There is in this forest," said Merlin the
Wild, "an oak laden with years: I saw it when it was beginning to grow
... I saw the acorn whence it rose, germinate and become a twig ... I
have then lived a long time." This would, in our opinion, tend to show
that this was an ordinary formula in the British language.

The third and last of those ballads tells, and not without humour, how
Paskou-Hir, _i. e._, Long-Paskou, the tailor, one Friday evening,
entered the abode of the Korred, and there dug up and carried home a
concealed treasure. They pursued him, and came into the court-yard
dancing with might and main, and singing,--

      Dilun, dimeurs, dimerc'her
      Ha diriaou, ha digwener.

      Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
      And Thursday, and Friday.

Finding the door secured[491] they mount the roof and break a hole
through which they get in, and resume their dance on the floor, still
singing, Monday, Tuesday, etc., and calling on the tailor to come and
join them and they would teach him a dance that would crack his
back-bone, and they end by telling him that the money of the Korr is
good for nothing.

Another version says, that it was a baker who stole the treasure, and,
more cunning than the tailor, he strewed the floor of his house with
hot ashes and cinders on which the Korred burned their feet. This made
them scamper off, but before they went they smashed all his crockery
and earthenware. Their words were, "In Iannik-ann-Trevou's house we
burnt our horny feet and made a fine mess of his crockery."

The following legend will explain the song of the Korred.

