
We add the following circumstances from other authorities:

At Carnac, near Quiberon, says M. de Cambry, in the department of
Morbihan, on the sea-shore, is the Temple of Carnac, called in Breton
"Ti Goriquet" (_House of the Gorics_), one of the most remarkable
Celtic monuments extant. It is composed of more than four thousand
large stones, standing erect in an arid plain, where neither tree nor
shrub is to be seen, and not even a pebble is to be found in the soil
on which they stand. If the inhabitants are asked concerning this
wonderful monument, they say it is an old camp of Cæsar's, an army
turned into stone, or that it is the work of the Crions or Gorics.
These they describe as little men between two and three feet high, who
carried these enormous masses on their hands; for, though little, they
are stronger than giants. Every night they dance around the stones;
and woe betide the traveller who approaches within their reach! he is
forced to join in the dance, where he is whirled about till,
breathless and exhausted, he falls down, amidst the peals of laughter
of the Crions. All vanish with the break of day.[494]

In the ruins of Tresmalouen dwell the Courils.[495] They are of a
malignant disposition, but great lovers of dancing. At night they sport
around the Druidical monuments. The unfortunate shepherd that approaches
them must dance their rounds with them till cock-crow; and the instances
are not few of persons thus ensnared who have been found next morning
dead with exhaustion and fatigue. Woe also to the ill-fated maiden who
draws near the Couril dance! nine months after, the family counts one
member more. Yet so great is the power and cunning of these Dwarfs, that
the young stranger bears no resemblance to them, but they impart to it
the features of some lad of the village.

A number of little men, not more than a foot high, dwell under the
castle of Morlaix. They live in holes in the ground, whither they may
often be seen going, and beating on basins. They possess great
treasures, which they sometimes bring out; and if any one pass by at
the time, allow him to take one handful, but no more. Should any one
attempt to fill his pockets, the money vanishes, and he is instantly
assailed by a shower of boxes in the ear from invisible hands.

The Bretons also say that there are spirits who silently skim the
milk-pans in the dairies. They likewise speak of Sand Yan y Tad (_St.
John and Father_), who carry five lights at their finger-ends, which
they make spin round and round like a wheel.[496]

There is a species of malignant beings, called Night-washers (_Eur
cunnerez noz_), who appear on the banks of streams, and call on the
passers-by to aid them to wash the linen of the dead. If any one
refuses, they drag him into the water and break his arms.

About Morlaix the people are afraid of evil beings they call Teurst.
One of these, called Teursapouliet, appears in the likeness of some
domestic animal.[497] In the district of Vannes is a colossal spirit
called Teus,[498] or Bugelnoz, who appears clothed in white between
midnight and two in the morning. His office is to rescue victims from
the Devil. He spreads his mantle over them, and they are secure. The
Devil comes over the ocean; but, unable to endure the look of the good
spirit, he sinks down again, and, the object of the spirit
accomplished, he vanishes.
