
      He has one daughter, who, each day with wine
      Or incense, or with something, worships me.
      She gives me crowns, and I in recompense
      Have now made Euclio find the treasure out,
      That if he will, he may more readily
      Get her a match.[501]

The Lars were a portion of the Etrurian religion. The Etruscan word
Lar signifies Lord, with which it has a curious but casual
resemblance.[502] The Lars were regarded, like the Grecian heroes, as
being the souls of men who, after death, still hovered about their
former abodes, averting dangers from, and bestowing blessings on, the
inhabitants. They differed from the Penates, who were, properly
speaking, Gods, beings of a higher nature, personifications of
natural powers, the givers of abundance and wealth.

The old Italians, it appears, believed in a being, we know not of what
size, called an Incubo, that watched over treasure. "But what they say
I know not," says Petronius,[503] "but I have heard how he snatched
the cap of an Incubo and found a treasure."

       *       *       *       *       *

Respecting the Fairy mythology of the modern Italians, what we have
been able to collect is very little.

The people of Naples, we are told,[504] believe in a being very much
resembling the Incubo, whom they call the Monaciello, or Little Monk.
They describe him as a short, thick kind of little man, dressed in the
long garments of a monk, with a broad-brimmed hat. He appears to
people in the dead of the night, and beckons to them to follow him. If
they have courage to do so, he leads them to some place where treasure
is concealed. Several are said to have made sudden fortunes through
him. In the Neapolitan story-book, named the Pentamerone, of which we
shall presently give an account, we meet with a Monaciello of a very
different character from this guardian of hidden treasure.

In the second tale of the first day of that work, when the prince in
the night heard the noise made by the Fairy in his room, "he thought
it was some chamber-boy coming to lighten his purse for him, or some
Monaciello to pull the clothes off him." And in the seventh tale of
the third day of the same collection, when Corvetto had hidden himself
under the Ogre's[505] bed to steal his quilt, "he began to pull quite
gently, when the Ogre awoke, and bid his wife not to pull the clothes
that way, or she'd strip him, and he would get his death of cold."
"Why, it's you that are stripping me," replied the Ogress, "and you
have not left a stitch on me." "Where the devil is the quilt?" says
the Ogre; and putting his hand to the ground, he happened to touch the
face of Corvetto, and immediately began to shout out, "The Monaciello,
the Monaciello, hola! candles! run, run!" Corvetto, meanwhile, got off
with his prize through the window.[506]

It is quite clear that the Monaciello is the same kind of being as the
House-spirit of the Gotho-German nations. He seems to belong
peculiarly to Naples, for we have not heard of him in any other part
of Italy. Now we are to recollect that this was the very place in
which the Normans settled, and so he may be their Nis or Kobold;[507]
or, as he is so very like the Spanish Duende, he may be that being
introduced by the Aragonese, who seem to have exercised so much
influence over the language and manners of the people of Naples.

       *       *       *       *       *

The belief in Mermaids also prevailed in modern Italy. In the reign of
Roger, king of Sicily, a young man happening to be bathing in the sea
late in the evening, perceived that something was following him.
Supposing it to be one of his companions, he caught it by the hair,
and dragged it on shore. But finding it to be a maiden of great beauty
and of most perfect form, he threw his cloak about her, and took her
home, where she continued with him till they had a son. There was one
thing however which greatly grieved him, which was the reflection that
so beautiful a form should be dumb, for he had never heard her speak.
One day he was reproached by one of his companions, who said that it
was a spectre, and not a real woman, that he had at home: being both
angry and terrified, he laid his hand on the hilt of his sword, and
urged her with vehemence to tell him who or what she was, threatening
if she did not do so, to kill the child before her eyes. The spirit
only saying, that he had lost a good wife by forcing her to speak,
instantly vanished, leaving her son behind. A few years after, as the
boy was playing on the sea-shore with his companions, the spirit his
mother dragged him into the sea, where he was drowned.[508]

       *       *       *       *       *

We now come to the Fate of romance and tale.

The earliest notice that we can recollect to have seen of these potent
ladies is in the Orlando Innamorato, where we meet the celebrated Fata
Morgana, who would at first appear to be, as a personification of
Fortune, a being of a higher order.

      Ivi è una fata nomata Morgana,
      Che a le genti diverse dona l'oro;
      Quanto e per tutto il mondo or se ne spande
      Convien che ad essa prima si dimande.
                                  L. I. c. xxv. st. 5. ed. 1831.

But we afterwards find her in her proper station, subject, with the
Fate and Witches, to the redoubtable Demogorgon.[509] When Orlando, on
delivering Zilante from her, makes her swear by that awful power, the
poet says:

      Sopra ogni fata è quel Demogorgone
      (Non so se mai l'odiste raccontare)
      E giudica tra loro e fa ragione,
      E quel che piace a lui può di lor fare.
      La notte si cavalea ad un montone,
      Travarca le montagne e passa il mare,
      E _strigie_, e _fate_, e fantasime vane
      Batte con serpi vive ogni dimane.

      Se le ritrova la dimane al mondo,
      Perchè non ponno al giorno comparire,
      Tanto le batte al colpo furibondo
      Che volentier vorrien poter morire.
      Or le incatena giù nel mar profondo,
      Or sopra il vento scalze la fa gire,
      Or per il fuoco dietro a sè le mena;
      A cui dà questa, a cui quell' altra pena.
                                         L. II. c. xiii. st. 27, 28.

According to Ariosto,[510] Demogorgon has a splendid temple palace in
the Himalaya mountains, whither every fifth year the Fate are all
summoned to appear before him, and give an account of their actions.
They travel through the air in various strange conveyances, and it is
no easy matter to distinguish between their convention and a Sabbath
of the Witches.

We meet with another Fata in Bojardo,[511] the beautiful Silvanella, who
raised a tomb over Narcissus, and then dissolved away into a fountain.

When Brandamarte opens the magnificent tomb and kisses the hideous
serpent that thrusts out its head, it gradually becomes a beautiful
maiden.

      Questa era Febosilla quella fata,
      Che edificato avea l'alto palaccio
      E'l bel giardino e quella sepoltura,
      Ove un gran tempo è stata in pena dura.

      Perchè una fata non può morir mai,
      Sin che non giunge il giorno del giudizio,
      Ma ben ne la sua forma dura assai,
      Mill' anni o più, sì come io aggio indizio.
      Poi (siccome di questa io vi contai
      Qual fabbricato avea il bell' edifizio)
      In serpe si tramuta e stavvi tanto
      Che di baciarla alcun si doni il vanto.
                                       L. II. c. xxvi. st. 14, 15

The other Fate who appear in this poem are Le Fate Nera and Bianca,
the protectresses of Guidone and Aquilante; the Fata della Fonte, from
whom Mandricardo obtains the arms of Hector, and finally Alcina, the
sister of Morgana, who carries off Astolfo. Dragontina and Falerina,
the owners of such splendid gardens, may also have been Fate, though
they are not called so by the poet.

Alcina re-appears in great splendour in the Orlando Furioso, where
she is given a sister named Logistilla, and both, like Morgana in the
preceding poem, are in a great measure allegorical. We also obtain
there a glimpse of the White and Black Fate. The Maga Manto of Dante
becomes here a Fata, and we meet her in the form of a serpent; to
account for which she says,

      Nascemmo ad un punto che d' ogni altro male
      Siamo capaci fuor che della morte.
      Ma giunta è con questo essere immortale
      Condizion non men del morir forte;
      Ch' ogni settimo giorno ognuna è certa
      Che la sua forma in biscia si converta.
                                            C. xliii. st. 98.

Elsewhere (x. 52) the poet tells us that

      Morir non puote alcuna fata mai
      Fin che il Sol gira, o il ciel non muta stilo.

In the Amadigi of Bernardo Tasso the Fate appear for the last time in
Italian poetry;[512] but in greater number, and, we may say, greater
splendour than elsewhere. There are two classes of them, the beneficent
and protective, and the seductive and injurious. The terms Maga and
Incantatrice, as well as Fata, are applied to them all indifferently.
The good Fairy-ladies are Urganda, termed _La savia_ and _La
sconosciuta_,[513] the guardian of Amadigi, and the fair Oriana; Silvana
or Silvanella who stands in a similar relation to Alidoro; Lucina, also
named La Donna del Lago, another protectress of Alidoro and of his
lady-love, the fair warrior Mirinda, sister of Amadigi; Eufrosina, the
sister of Lucina; Argea, called La Reina della Fate, the protectress of
Floridante, to whom, after making him undergo various trials, she gives
her daughter Filidora in marriage; finally, Argea's sister Filidea. The
Fate whose character resembles that of Alcina are Morganetta, Nivetta,
and Carvilia, the three daughters of Morgana. Beside these then are two
Fate of neutral character, Dragontina, who formed a palace, temple and
gardens, in which, at the desire of her father, she enchanted a young
prince and his wife; and Montana, who, to avenge the fate of her lover,
slain by Alidoro, enchanted that warrior in a temple which she had
raised to the memory of the fallen.[514]

      Ma veggiam ch' io non stessi troppo a bada
      Con queste Alcine e Morgane.

The earliest collections of European Fairy-tales in prose belong to
Italy. In 1550, Straparola, a native of Caravaggio, in the Milanese,
published at Venice his Notti Piacevoli, a collection of tales, jokes,
and riddles, of which several, and those the best, are Fairy-tales.
These were translated into French in 1560-76, and seem to have been the
origin of the so well known Contes des Feés. Perrault's Puss in Boots
(_Le Chat Botté_,) and the Princess Fairstar (_Belle Etoile_,) and many
others of Madame D'Aulnoy's, who borrowed largely from the Notti
Piacevoli, are to be found in Straparola. In 1637, eighty-seven years
after the Notti Piacevoli appeared at Naples, and in the Neapolitan
dialect, the Pentamerone, the best collection of Fairy-tales ever
written.[515] The author, Giambattista Basile,[516] had spent his youth
in Candia, and then passed several years rambling through Italy. He
seems to have carefully treasured up all the tales he heard, and he
wrote and published them, under the feigned name of Gian Alesio
Abbatutis, in his native dialect, not long before his death.

In the Tales and Popular Fictions we gave some translations from the
Notti Piacevoli, the only ones in English, and they will probably
remain such, as the work is not one likely ever to be translated. In
the same work we gave two from the Pentamerone, and three (the Dragon,
Gagliuso, and the Goatface) in the former edition of the present work.
Most certainly we were the first to render any of these curious tales
into English, and we look back with a mixture of pleasure and surprise
at our success in the unaided struggle with an idiom so different from
the classic Italian.[517] We fancied that we had been the first to
make translations from it into any language, but we afterwards learned
that of the two tales in our other work, the one, Peruonto, had been
translated into French (probably by the Abbé Galiani) for the Cabinet
des Fées, the other, the Serpent into German, by M. Grimm.[518] Of
late, this most original work has been brought within the reach of
ordinary readers by two translations, the one in German by Felix
Liebrecht, who has given the work complete with few omissions; the
other in English by Mr. J. E. Taylor, who has made a selection of
thirty tales, and these most carefully expurgated, in order that
agreeably to its second title, it might form a book of amusement even
for children--a most difficult task, and in which his success has been
far greater than might have been anticipated. All our own translations
have been incorporated in it, and we can safely refer to it those who
wish to know the real character and nature of the Pentamerone.

Whatever name Basile might give his book it is quite plain that he
never could have meant it merely for children. The language alone is
proof enough on that head. It is, besides, full of learned allusions
and of keen satire, so that it could only be understood and relished
by grown persons, for whose amusement it was apparently designed; and
its tales are surely not much more extravagant than some of those in
Ariosto and the other romantic poets. It in fact never was a child's
book like the Contes de ma Mère l' Oie. It has now become very scarce;
we could not at Naples meet with a copy of it, or even with any one
who had read it.
