                        _Pepito el Corcovado._

Pepito el Corcovado,[525] a gay lively little hunchback, used to gain
his living by his voice and his guitar; for he was a general favourite,
and was in constant request at weddings and other festivities. He was
going home one night from one of these festive occasions, being under
engagement for another in the morning, and, as it was in the celebrated
Sierra Morena, he contrived to lose his way. After trying in vain to
find it, he wrapped his cloak about him, and lay down for the night at
the foot of a cork-tree. He had hardly, however, gone to sleep, when he
was awakened by the sound of a number of little voices singing to an old
air with which he was well acquainted,

      Lunes y Martes y Miercoles tres

over and over again. Deeming this to be imperfect, he struck in, adding,

      Jueves y Viernes y Sabado seis.

The little folk were quite delighted, and for hours the mountain rang
with

      Lunes y Martes y Miercoles tres,
      Jueves y Viernes y Sabado seis.

      Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday three,
      Thursday and Friday and Saturday, six.


They finally crowded round Pepito, and bade him ask what he would for
having completed their song so beautifully. After a little
consideration, he begged to have his hump removed. So said so done, he
was in an instant one of the straightest men in all Spain. On his
return home, every one was amazed at the transformation. The story
soon got wind, and another hunchback, named Cirillo, but unlike
Pepito, as crooked in temper as in person, having learned from him
where the scene of his adventure lay, resolved to proceed thither and
try his luck. He accordingly reached the spot, sat under the
cork-tree, and saw and heard all that Pepito had heard and seen. He
resolved also to add to the song, and he struck in with "Y Domingo
siete" (_and Sunday seven_); but whether it was the breach of rhythm,
or the mention of the Lord's Day that gave offence, he was instantly
assailed with a shower of blows or pinches, and to make his calamity
the greater, Pepito's hump was added to his own.[526]

       *       *       *       *       *