
We thus may see that there are beings in Spain also answering to the
various classes of Fairies. But none of these have obtained the same
degree of reputation as the House-spirit, whose Spanish name is Duende
or Trasgo. In Torquemada's Spanish Mandeville, as the old English
version of it is named, there is a section devoted to the Duende, in
which some of his feats, such as pelting people with stones, clay, and
such like, are noticed, and in the last century the learned Father
Feijoo wrote an essay on Duendes,[527] _i.e._ on House-spirits; for he
says little of the proper Spanish Duende, and his examples are Hödiken
and the Kobolds, of which he had read in Agricola and other writers.
On the whole, perhaps, the best account of the Duende will be found in
Calderon's spritely comedy, named La Dama Duende.

In this piece, when Cosme, who pretends that he had seen the Duende
when he put out his candle, is asked by his master what he was like,
he replies:

                 Era un fraile
      Tamañito, y tenia puesto
      Un cucurucho tamaño;
      Que por estas señas creo
      Que era duende capuchino.

This _cucurucho_ was a long conical hat without a brim worn by the
clergy in general, and not by the Capuchins alone. A little before,
Cosme, when seeking to avert the appearance of the Duende, recites the
following lines, which have the appearance of being formed from some
popular charm against the House-spirit:

      Señora dama duende,
      Duelase de mi;
      Que soy niño y solo,
      Y nunca en tal me ví.

In De Solis' very amusing comedy of Un Bobo hace Ciento, Doña Ana
makes the following extremely pretty application of the popular idea
of the Duende:

      Yo soy, don Luis, una dama
      Que no conozco este duende
      Del amor, si no es por fama.

In another of his plays (_El Amor al Uso_), a lady says:

      Amor es duende importuno
      Que al mundo asombrando trae;
      Todos dicen que le ay,
      Y no le ha visto ninguno.

The lines from Calderon prefixed to this section of our work, show
that money given by the Duende was as unsubstantial as fairy-money in
general. This is confirmed by Don Quixote, who tells his rather
covetous squire, that "los tesoros de los caballeros andantes son,
como los de los Duendes, aparentes y falsos."

The Spaniards seem also to agree with the people of other countries in
regarding the Fairies as being fallen angels. One of their most
celebrated poets thus expresses himself:

      Disputase por hombres entendidos
      Si fué de _los caidos_ este duende.

Some Spanish etymologists say that Duende is a contraction of _Dueño
de casa_; others, that it comes from the Arabic _Dûar_, (dwelling) the
term used for the Arab camps on the north-coast of Africa. To us it
appears more probable that the Visigoths brought their ancient popular
creed with them to Spain[528] also, and that as Duerg became Drac in
Provence, it was converted into Duende in Spain.[529] It is further
not quite impossible that Duerg may be also the original of Trasgo, a
word for which we believe no etymon has been proposed.
