                             PERRAULT.

The Fairy mythology of France may be divided, as respects its locality,
into two parts, that of Northern and that of Southern France, the Langue
d'Oil and the Langue d'Oc. We will commence with the latter, as adjacent
to Spain. Of its mythology, Gervase of Tilbury, who resided in the
kingdom of Arles, has left us some interesting particulars, and other
authorities enable us to trace it down to the present day. Speaking of
the inhabitants of Arles, Gervase thus expresses himself:

"They also commonly assert, that the Dracs assume the human form, and
come early into the public market-place without any one being thereby
disturbed. These, they say, have their abode in the caverns of rivers,
and occasionally, floating along the stream in the form of gold rings or
cups, entice women or boys who are bathing on the banks of the river;
for, while they endeavour to grasp what they see, they are suddenly
seized and dragged down to the bottom: and this, they say, happens to
none more than to suckling women, who are taken by the Dracs to rear
their unlucky offspring; and sometimes, after they have spent seven
years there, they return to our hemisphere. These women say that they
lived with the Dracs and their wives in ample palaces, in the caverns
and banks of rivers. We have ourselves seen one of these women, who was
taken away while washing clothes on the banks of the Rhone. A wooden
bowl floated along by her, and, in endeavouring to catch it, having got
out into the deep water, she was carried down by a Drac, and made nurse
to his son below the water. She returned uninjured, and was hardly
recognised by her husband and friends after seven years' absence.

"After her return she related very wonderful things, such as that the
Dracs lived on people they had carried off, and turned themselves into
human forms; and she said that one day, when the Drac gave her an
eel-pasty to eat, she happened to put her fingers, that were greasy
with the fat, to one of her eyes and one side of her face, and she
immediately became endowed with most clear and distinct vision under
the water. When the third year of her time was expired, and she had
returned to her family, she very early one morning met the Drac in the
market-place of Beaucaire. She knew him at once, and saluting him,
inquired about the health of her mistress and the child. To this the
Drac replied, 'Harkye,' said he, 'with which eye do you see me?' She
pointed to the eye she had touched with the fat: the Drac immediately
thrust his finger into it, and he was no longer visible to any
one."[530]
