
Respecting the Dracs, Gervase farther adds:

"There is also on the banks of the Rhone, under a guardhouse, at the
North-gate of the city of Arles, a great pool of the river.... In
these deep places, they say that the Dracs are often seen of bright
nights, in the shape of men. A few years ago there was, for three
successive days, openly heard the following words in the place outside
the gate of the city, which I have mentioned, while the figure as it
were of a man ran along the bank: 'The hour is passed, and the man
does not come.' On the third day, about the ninth hour, while that
figure of a man raised his voice higher than usual, a young man ran
simply to the bank, plunged in, and was swallowed up; and the voice
was heard no more."

The word Drac is apparently derived from Draco; but we are inclined to
see its origin in the Northern _Duerg_. We must recollect that the
Visigoths long occupied Provence and Languedoc. It is, we apprehend,
still in use. _Fa le Drac_, in Provençal, signifies _Faire le
diable_.[531] Goudelin, a Provençal poet of the seventeenth century,
begins his Castel en l'Ayre with these lines:

      Belomen qu' yeu _faré le Drac_
      Se jamay trobi dins un sac
      Cinc ô siés milante pistolos
      Espessos como de redolos.

The following curious narrative also occurs in Gervase's work, and
might seem to belong to Provence:--

"Seamen tell that one time as a ship was sailing in the Mediterranean
sea, which sea we call ours, she was surrounded by an immense number of
porpoises (_delphinos_), and that when an active young man, one of the
crew, had wounded one of them with a weapon, and all the rest of them
had rapidly sought the bottom, a sudden and awful tempest enveloped the
ship. While the sailors were in doubt of their lives, lo! one in the
form of a knight came borne on a steed on the sea, and demanded that,
for the salvation of all the rest, the person who had wounded the
porpoise should be delivered up to him. The sailors were in an agony
between their own danger and their aversion to expose their comrade to
death, which seemed to them to be most cruel, and they thought it
infamous to consult their own safety at the expense of the life of
another. At last the man himself, deeming it better that all should be
saved at the cost of one, as they were guiltless, than that such a
number of people should run the risk of destruction on account of his
folly, and lest by defending him they should become guilty, devoted
himself to the death he merited, and voluntarily mounted the horse
behind the rider, who went over the firm water, taking his road along it
as if it had been the solid land. In a short time he reached a distant
region, where he found lying in a magnificent bed the knight whom he had
wounded the day before as a porpoise. He was directed by his guide to
pull out the weapon which was sticking in the wound, and when he had
done so, _the guilty right hand gave aid to the wound_. This being done,
the sailor was speedily brought back to the ship, and restored to his
companions. Hence it is, that from that time forth sailors have ceased
to hunt the porpoises."[532]

Gervase also describes the Kobold, or House-spirit, the Esprit Follet,
or Goblin of the North of France.

"There are," says he, "other demons, commonly called Follets, who
inhabit the houses of simple country people, and can be kept away
neither by water nor exorcisms; and as they are not seen, they pelt
people as they are going in at the door with stones, sticks, and
domestic utensils. Their words are heard like those of men, but their
form does not appear. I remember to have met several wonderful stories
of them in the Vita Abbreviata, et Miraculis beatissimi Antonii."[533]

Elsewhere[534] he speaks of the beings which he says are called Lamiæ,
who, he relates, are used to enter houses suddenly, ransack the jars
and tubs, pots and pitchers, take the children out of the cradles,
light lamps or candles, and sometimes oppress those who are sleeping.

Either Gervase mistook, or the Fadas of the south of France were
regarded as beings different from mankind. The former is, perhaps, the
more likely supposition. He thus speaks of them: "This, indeed, we
know to be proved every day by men who are beyond all exception; that
we have heard of some who were lovers of phantoms of this kind,[535]
which they call Fadas; and when they married other women, they died
before consummating the marriage. We have seen most of them live in
great temporal felicity, who when they withdrew themselves from the
embraces of these Fadas, or discovered the secret, lost not only their
temporal prosperity, but even the comfort of wretched life."[536]

"In the legend of St. Armentaire, composed about 1300, by Raymond, a
gentleman of Provence, we read of the Fée Esterelle, and of the
sacrifices to her, who used to give barren women beverages to drink,
to make them fruitful; and of a stone called _La Lauza de la Fada;_
that is the Fairy-stone on which they used to sacrifice to her."[537]

Even at the present day the belief in the Fadas seems to linger in
Provence and the adjoining districts.

"On the night of the 31st of December," says Du Mege,[538] the "Fées
(_Hadas_) enter the dwellings of their worshipers. They bear good-luck
in their right, ill-luck in their left-hand. Care has been taken to
prepare for them in a clean retired room, such a repast as is suited
to them. The doors and windows are left open; a white cloth is laid on
a table with a loaf, a knife, a vessel full of water or wine, and a
cup. A lighted candle or wax taper is set in the centre of the table.
It is the general belief that those who present them with the best
food may expect all kinds of prosperity for their property and their
family; while those who acquit themselves grudgingly of their duty
toward the Fées, or who neglect to make preparations worthy of these
divinities, may expect the greatest misfortunes."

From the following passage of the Roman de Guillaume au Court-Nez it
would appear that three was the number of the Hadas.

      Coustume avoient les gens, par véritez,
      Et _en Provence_ et en autres regnez.
      Tables métoient et siéges ordenez,
      Et sur la table iij blans pains bulétez,
      Iij poz de vins et iij hénez de lès
      Et par eneoste iert li enfès posez.[539]

Some years ago a lady, named Marie Aycard, published a volume named
"Ballades et Chants populaires de la Provence," two of which seem to be
founded on popular legends. She names the one La Fée aux Cheveux Verts,
and in it relates the story of a young mariner of Marseilles who was in
the habit of rowing out to sea by himself in the evening. On one of
these occasions he felt himself drawn down by an invisible power, and on
reaching the bottom found himself at the gate of a splendid palace,
where he was received by a most beautiful fairy, only her hair was
green. She at once told him her love, to which he responded as she
wished, and after detaining him some time she dismissed him, giving him
two fishes, that he might account for his absence by saying that he had
been fishing. The same invisible power brought him back to his boat, and
he reached home at sunrise. The size and form of his fishes, such as had
never been seen, excited general wonder; but he feared the fairy too
much to reveal his secret. An invincible attraction still drew him to
the submarine palace, but at last he saw a maiden whose charms, in his
eyes, eclipsed those of the fairy. He now fled the sea-shore, but every
time he approached his mistress he received an invisible blow, and he
continually was haunted by threatening voices. At length he felt an
irresistible desire to go out again to sea. When there he was drawn down
as before to the palace, but the fairy now was changed, and saying, "You
have betrayed me--you shall die," she caused him to be devoured by the
sea-monsters. But other accounts say that she kept him with her till age
had furrowed his brow with wrinkles, and then sent him back to poverty
on earth.

The other legend named Le Lutin tells how seven little boys,
regardless of the warnings of their old grandmother, would go out at
night on various affairs. As they went along a pretty little black
horse came up to them, and they all were induced to mount on his back.
When they met any of their playmates they invited them also to mount,
and the back of the little horse, stretched so that at last he had on
him not less than thirty little boys. He then made with all speed for
the sea, and plunging into it with them they were all drowned.[540]

Passing to Auvergne we find Gregory of Tours in the sixth century thus
relating an event which happened in his youth. A man was going one
morning to the forest, and he took the precaution to have his
breakfast, which he was taking with him, blessed before he set out.
Coming to the river, before it was yet day, he drove his bullock-cart
into the ferry-boat (_in ponte qui super navem est_), and when he was
about half-way over he heard a voice saying, "Down with him! down with
him! be quick!" (_Merge, merge, ne moreris!_) to which another
replied, "I should have done it without your telling me if something
holy did not prevent me; for I would have you to know that he is
fortified with the priest's blessing, so that I cannot hurt him."[541]

Miss Costello[542] heard in Auvergne a story of a changeling, which the
mother, by the direction of the Curé, took to the market-place, where
she whipped it well, till its mother, La Fée du Grand Cascade, brought
her back her own child. She also relates at great length a legend which
she styles La Blonde de la Roche, in which a young lady, instructed by
her nurse, learns to change her form, and thus become a companion of the
Fées, who are beings of tiny dimensions. Afterwards, when she is
married, they take away her children, but she manages to recover them.
