"La Tioul de las Fadas is within five and a half leagues of St. Flour,
at Pirols, a village of Haute Auvergne. It is composed of six large
rude stones, covered by a seventh, larger and more massive than the
rest; it is twelve feet long, and eight and a half wide. The tradition
relates that a Fée who was fond of keeping her sheep on the spot
occupied by this monument, resolved to shelter herself from the wind
and rain. For this purpose she went far, very far, (_bien loin, bien
loin_) in search of such masses of granite, as six yoke of oxen could
not move, and she gave them the form of a little house. She carried,
it is said, the largest and heaviest of them on the top of her
spindle, and so little was she incommoded by the weight of it, that
she continued to spin all the way."[543]

The following legend is traditional in Périgord:--

Embosomed in the forest of the canton of La Double, near the road
leading from Périgueux to Ribérac, is a monument named Roque Brun. It
consists of four enormous rocks placed two and two, so as to form an
alley ten feet long and six wide. A fifth rock, higher and thicker
than the others, closes this space on the west. The whole is covered
by a huge mass of rock, at least twelve feet by seven, and from three
to four feet thick. There can be no doubt of its being the work of
man, and it is remarkable that the stone composing it is different
from that of the soil on which it stands.[544] The tradition of the
canton, however, is, that many thousand years ago there was a Fée who
was the sovereign of the whole country, and having lost her husband in
a battle fought in this very place she resolved to bury him on the
spot. She therefore called six of her pages, and ordered them to
fetch, each one of these stones, and to place them in the order which
they still maintain. They instantly obeyed, and they carried and
arranged the huge masses as easily as if they had been only
rose-leaves. When the tomb was completed, the Fairy ascended it, and
turning to the east, she thrice cursed, in a voice of thunder, whoever
should henceforth dare even to touch this monument of her royal
spouse. Many an instance is still recorded by the peasantry of those
who dared and were punished.[545]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Fairy-lore of the North of France, at least of Normandy, is, as
was to be expected, similar to that of the other portions of the
Gotho-German race. We meet it in the _fées_ or fairies, and the
_lutins_ or _gobelins_, which answer to the Kobolds, Nisses, and such
like of those nations.[546]

The Fées are small and handsome in person; they are fond of dancing
in the night-time, and in their dances which are circular they form
the _Cercles des Fées_, or fairy-rings. If any one approaches their
dance, he is irresistibly impelled to take part in it. He is admitted
with the greatest courtesy; but as the whirling movement increases,
and goes faster and faster, his head becomes giddy, and he falls to
the ground utterly exhausted. Sometimes the _fées_ amuse themselves by
flinging him up to a great height in the air, and, if not killed by
the fall, he is found next morning full of bruises. These little
beings, it is also said, haunt solitary springs, where they wash their
linen, which they then dry by way of preference on the Druidic stones,
if at hand, and lay up in the hollows of rocks or barrows, thence
named _Chambres_ or _Grottes des Fées_. But, further, it is said of
them, like the _Lutins_, they select particular farms to which they
resort at night, and there making use of horses, harness and utensils
of all kinds, they employ themselves at various kinds of work, of
which, however, no traces remain in the morning. They are fond of
mounting and galloping the horses; their seat is on the neck, and they
tie together locks of the mane to form stirrups. Their presence,
however, always brings luck, the cattle thrive where they are, the
utensils of which they have made use, if broken are mended and made as
good as new. They are altogether most kind and obliging, and have been
known to give cakes to those to whom they have taken a fancy.

The Fées of Normandy are, like others, guilty of child-changing. A
countrywoman as she was one day carrying her child on her arm met a Fée
similarly engaged, who proposed an exchange. But she would not consent,
even though, she said, the Fée's babe were _nine times finer than her
own_. A few days after, having left her child in the house when she went
to work in the fields, it appeared to her on her return that it had been
changed. She immediately consulted a neighbour, who to put the matter to
the proof, broke a dozen eggs and ranged the shells before the child,
who instantly began to cry out, _Oh! what a number of cream-pots! Oh!
what a number of cream-pots!_ The matter was now beyond doubt, and the
neighbour next advised to make it cry lustily in order to bring its real
mother to it. This also succeeded; the Fée came imploring them to spare
her child, and the real one should be restored.

There is another kind of Fées known in Normandy by the name of _Dames
Blanches_, or White Ladies, who are of a less benevolent character.
These lurk in narrow places, such as ravines, fords and bridges, where
passengers cannot well avoid them, and there seek to attract their
attention. The Dame Blanche sometimes requires him whom she thus meets
to join her in a dance, or to hand her over a plank. If he does so she
makes him many courtesies, and then vanishes. One of these ladies
named La Dame d'Aprigny, used to appear in a winding narrow ravine
which occupied the place of the present Rue Saint Quentin at Bayeux,
where, by her involved dances, she prevented any one from passing. She
meantime held out her hand, inviting him to join her, and if he did so
she dismissed him after a round or two; but if he drew back, she
seized him and flung him into one of the ditches which were full of
briars and thorns. Another Dame Blanche took her station on a narrow
wooden bridge over the Dive, in the district of Falaise, named the
Pont d'Angot. She sat on it and would not allow any one to pass unless
he went on his knees to her; if he refused, the Fée gave him over to
the _lutins_, the cats, owls, and other beings which, under her sway,
haunt the place, by whom he was cruelly tormented.

Near the village of Puys, half a league to the north-east of Dieppe,
there is a high plateau, surrounded on all sides by large
entrenchments, except that over the sea, where the cliffs render it
inaccessible. It is named _La Cité de Limes_ or _La Camp de César_ or
simply _Le Catel_ or _Castel_. Tradition tells that the Fées used to
hold a fair there, at which all sorts of magic articles from their
secret stores were offered for sale, and the most courteous entreaties
and blandishments were employed to induce those who frequented it to
become purchasers. But the moment any one did so, and stretched forth
his hand to take the article he had selected, the perfidious Fées
seized him and hurled him down the cliffs.

Such are the accounts of the Fées still current in Normandy. To these
we may add that of Dame Abonde or Habonde, current in the middle ages.
William of Auvergne, bishop of Paris, who died in the year 1248, thus
writes:--

"Sunt et aliæ ludificationes malignorum spiritorum quas faciunt
interdum in nemoribus et locis amoenis, et frondosis arboribus, ubi
apparent in similitudine _puellarum_ aut _matronarum_ ornatu muliebri
et _candido_; interdum etiam _in stabulis, cum luminaribus cereis, ex
quibus apparent distillationes in comis et collis equorum et comæ
ipsorum diligenter tricatoe_; et audies eos, qui talia se vidisse
fatentur, dicentes veram ceram esse quæ de luminaribus hujusmodi
stillaverat. De illis vero substantiis quæ apparent in domibus quas
_dominas nocturnas_ et _principem_ earum vocant _Dominam Abundiam_ pro
eo quod domibus, quas frequentant, abundantiam bonorum temporalium
præstare putantur non aliter tibi sentiendum est neque aliter quam
quemadmodum de illis audivisti. Quapropter eo usque invaluit stultitia
hominum et insania vetularum ut vasa vini et receptacula ciborum
discooperta relinquant, et omnino nec obstruent neque claudant eis
noctibus quibus ad domos suos eas credunt adventuras; ea de causa
videlicet ut cibos et potus quasi paratos inveniant, et eos absque
difficultate apparitionis pro beneplacito sumant."[547]

Dame Abonde is also mentioned in the same century in the celebrated
Roman de la Rose as follows:--

      Qui les cine sens ainsine deçoit
      Par les fantosmes qu'il reçoit,
      Dont maintes gens par lor folie
      Cuident estre par nuit estries (_allés_)
      _Errans_ avecques _Dame Habonde_.
      Et dient que par tout le monde
      Si tiers enfant de nacion (_naissance_)
      Sunt de ceste condicion,
      Qu'ils vont trois fois en la semaine,
      Li cum destinée les maine (_mène_),
      Et par tous ces ostex (_hôtels_) se boutent,
      Ne eles ne barres ne redoutent.
      Ains sen entrent par les fendaces (_fentes_)
      Par chatieres et par crevaces.
      Et se partent des cors les ames
      Et vont avec les _bonnes dames_
      Par leur foraius et par maisons.
      Et le preuvent par tiex (_ces_) raisons:
      Que les diversités veues
      Ne sont pas eu lor liz (_lits_) venues,
      Ains (_anzi_ It.) sunt lor ames que laborent
      Et par le monde ainsinc sen corent.[548]

In these places we find that Abundia is a queen or ruler over a band
of what we may call fairies, who enter houses at night, feast there,
twist the horses' manes, etc. This may remind us at once of
Shakespeare's Queen Mab, whom, though only acquainted with Habundia
through a passage in Heywood,[549] we conjectured to have derived her
name from that of this French dame.[550] Chaucer, by the way, always
spells _habundance_ with an _h_, which may have become _m_ as it does
_n_ in Numps from Humphrey; so Edward makes Ned, Oliver Noll, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Lutin or Gobelin[551] of Normandy hardly differs in any respect
from the domestic spirit of Scandinavia and Germany. He is fond of
children and horses; and if the proverb

      Ou il y a belle fille et bon vin
      Là aussi hante le lutin

lie not, of young maidens also. He caresses the children, and gives
them nice things to eat, but he also whips and pinches them if
naughty.[552] He takes great care of the horses, gallops them at
times, and _lutines_ their manes, _i.e._, _elfs_ or plaits and twists
them in an inexplicable manner. So fond, indeed, is he of this
amusement, that it is related that when one time two young girls fell
asleep in a stable, he _lutined_ their hair in such a way that they
had to cut it all off. Sometimes the Lutin takes the form of a young
villager, and struts about with great complacency. On such occasions
it is necessary to call him Bon Garçon, a thing the Norman peasant
never neglects to do. At other times he appears under the form of a
horse ready bridled and saddled. If any peasant, weary after his day's
work, is induced to mount him in order to ride home, he begins to kick
and fling and rear and bound, and ends by jerking him into a marsh or
a ditch full of water. When he takes this form he is called Le Cheval
Bayard, probably after the famous steed of the Paladin Rinaldo.

The following tradition of "_Le Lutin, ou le Fé amoureux_," is related
in the neighbourhood of Argentan:--

A Fé was fond of a pretty young _paysanne_, and used to come every
evening when she was spinning at her fireside, and take his seat on a
stool opposite to her, and keep gazing on her fair face. The
ungrateful object of this respectful attention, however, told her
husband the whole story, and in his jealous mood he resolved to have
his revenge of the amorous Lutin. Accordingly, he heated the girdel
(_galetière_) red-hot, and placed it on the seat which he used to
occupy, and then dressing himself in his wife's clothes, he sat in her
place, and began to spin as well as he could. The Fé came as usual,
and instantly perceived the change. "Where," said he, "is La-belle
belle of yesterday evening, who draws, draws, and keeps always
twirling, while you, you turn, turn, and never twirl?" He, however,
went and took his usual seat, but immediately jumped up, screaming
with pain. His companions, who were at hand, inquired the cause. "I am
burnt," cried he. "Who burned you?" cried they. "Myself," replied he;
for this the woman had told him was her husband's name. At this they
mocked at him and went away.[553]

The best way, it is said, to banish a Lutin who haunts a house, is to
scatter flax-seed in the room that he most frequents. His love of
neatness and regularity will not allow him to let it lie there, and he
soon gets tired of picking it up, and so he goes away.

A Lutin, named the Nain Rouge, haunts the coast of Normandy. He is
kind in his way to the fishermen, and often gives them valuable aid;
but he punishes those who do not treat him with proper respect. Two
fishermen who lived near Dieppe, were going one day to Pollet. On
their way they found a little boy sitting on the road-side; they asked
him what he was doing there. "I am resting myself," said he, "for I am
going to Berneville" (a village within a league of Pollet.) They
invited him to join company; he agreed, and amused them greatly with
his tricks as they went along. At last, when they came to a pond near
Berneville, the malicious urchin caught up one of them, and flung him,
like a shuttlecock, up into the air over it; but, to his great
disappointment, he saw him land safe and sound at the other side.
"Thank your patron-Saint," cried he, with his cracked voice, "for
putting it into your mind to take some holy water when you were
getting up this morning. But for that you'd have got a nice dip."[554]

A parcel of children were playing on the strand at Pollet, when Le
Petit Homme Rouge came by. They began to make game of him, and he
instantly commenced pelting them with stones at such a rate that they
found it necessary to seek refuge in a fishing-boat, where, for the
space of an hour, as they crouched under the hatches, they heard the
shower of stones falling so that they were sure the boat must be
buried under them. At length the noise ceased, and when they ventured
to peep out, not a stone was to be seen.

There is also in Normandy a kind of spirits called Lubins, which take
the form of wolves, and enter the churchyards under the guidance of a
chief, who is quite black. They are very timorous, and at the least
noise they fly, crying "_Robert est mort! Robert est mort!_" People
say of a timorous man, "_Il a peur de Lubins!_"[555]

A belief in Fées, similar to those which we have denominated Fairies of
Romance, seems to have prevailed all over France during the middle ages.

The great Bertrand Duguesclin married a lady named Tiphaine, "extraite
de noble lignée," says his old biographer; "laquelle avoit environ
vingt-quatre ans, ne onques n'avoit été mariée et éstoit bonne et
sage, et moult experte aux arts d'astronomie; aucuns disoient qu'elle
éstoit _faée_ mais non éstoit, mais éstoit ainsi inspirée et de la
Grace de Dieu."

One of the chief articles of accusation against the heroic and
unfortunate Maid of Orleans, was "Que souvent alloit à une belle
fontaine au pais de Lorraine, laquelle elle nommoit _bonne fontaine
aux Fées_ nostre Seigneur, et en icelui lieu tous ceulx de pays quand
ils avoient fiebvre ils alloient pour recouvrer garison, et la alloit
souvent la dite Jehanne la Pucelle, sous un grand arbre qui la
fontaine ombroit, et s'apparurent à elle St. Katerine et St.
Marguerite."[556] She was also asked "Si elle sçait rien de _ceux qui
vont avecq les Fées_?"[557]

Of these Fées the most celebrated is Melusina, who was married to the
Count of Lusignan. Toward the end of the fourteenth century, Jean
d'Arras collected the traditions relating to her, and composed what he
called her "Chronicle." Stephen, a Dominican of the house of Lusignan,
took up the history written by Jean D'Arras, gave it consistency, and
cast such splendour about his heroine, that several noble houses were
ambitious of showing a descent from her. Those of Luxembourg and Rohan
even falsified their genealogies for that purpose; and the house of
Sassenage, though it might claim its descent from a monarch, preferred
Melusina, and to gratify them it was feigned that when she quitted
Lusignan she retired to the grot of Sassenage, in Dauphiny.

The following is a slight sketch of the story of the fair Melusina.[558]

      Ange par la figure, et serpent par le rest
                                        DE LILLE.


