                        _Legend of Melusina._

Elinas, king of Albania, to divert his grief for the death of his
wife, amused himself with hunting. One day, at the chase, he went to a
fountain to quench his thirst: as he approached it he heard the voice
of a woman singing, and on coming to it he found there the beautiful
Fay Pressina.

After some time the Fay bestowed her hand upon him, on the condition
that he should never visit her at the time of her lying-in. She had
three daughters at a birth: Melusina, Melior, and Palatina. Nathas,
the king's son by a former wife, hastened to convey the joyful tidings
to his father, who, without reflection, flew to the chamber of the
queen, and entered as she was bathing her daughters. Pressina, on
seeing him, cried out that he had broken his word, and she must
depart; and taking up her three daughters, she disappeared.

She retired to the Lost Island;[559] so called because it was only by
chance any, even those who had repeatedly visited it, could find it.
Here she reared her children, taking them every morning to a high
mountain, whence Albania might be seen, and telling them that but for
their father's breach of promise they might have lived happily in the
distant land which they beheld. When they were fifteen years of age,
Melusina asked her mother particularly of what their father had been
guilty. On being informed of it, she conceived the design of being
revenged on him. Engaging her sisters to join in her plans, they set
out for Albania: arrived there, they took the king and all his wealth,
and, by a charm, inclosed him in a high mountain, called Brandelois.
On telling their mother what they had done, she, to punish them for
the unnatural action, condemned Melusina to become every Saturday a
serpent, from the waist downwards, till she should meet a man who
would marry her under the condition of never seeing her on a Saturday,
and should keep his promise. She inflicted other judgements on her two
sisters, less severe in proportion to their guilt. Melusina now went
roaming through the world in search of the man who was to deliver her.
She passed through the Black Forest, and that of Ardennes, and at last
she arrived in the forest of Colombiers, in Poitou, where all the Fays
of the neighbourhood came before her, telling her they had been
waiting for her to reign in that place.

Raymond having accidentally killed the count, his uncle, by the
glancing aside of his boar-spear, was wandering by night in the forest
of Colombiers. He arrived at a fountain that rose at the foot of a
high rock. This fountain was called by the people the Fountain of
Thirst, or the Fountain of the Fays,[560] on account of the many
marvellous things which had happened at it. At the time, when Raymond
arrived at the fountain, three ladies were diverting themselves there
by the light of the moon, the principal of whom was Melusina. Her
beauty and her amiable manners quickly won his love: she soothed him,
concealed the deed he had done, and married him, he promising on his
oath never to desire to see her on a Saturday. She assured him that a
breach of his oath would for ever deprive him of her whom he so much
loved, and be followed by the unhappiness of both for life. Out of her
great wealth, she built for him, in the neighbourhood of the Fountain
of Thirst, where he first saw her, the castle of Lusignan. She also
built La Rochelle, Cloitre Malliers, Mersent, and other places.

But destiny, that would have Melusina single, was incensed against her.
The marriage was made unhappy by the deformity of the children born of
one that was enchanted; but still Raymond's love for the beauty that
ravished both heart and eyes remained unshaken. Destiny now renewed her
attacks. Raymond's cousin had excited him to jealousy and to secret
concealment, by malicious suggestions of the purport of the Saturday
retirement of the countess. He hid himself; and then saw how the lovely
form of Melusina ended below in a snake, gray and sky-blue, mixed with
white. But it was not horror that seized him at the sight, it was
infinite anguish at the reflection that through his breach of faith he
might lose his lovely wife for ever. Yet this misfortune had not
speedily come on him, were it not that his son, Geoffroi with the
tooth,[561] had burned his brother Freimund, who would stay in the abbey
of Malliers, with the abbot and a hundred monks. At which the afflicted
father, count Raymond, when his wife Melusina was entering his closet to
comfort him, broke out into these words against her, before all the
courtiers who attended her:--"Out of my sight, thou pernicious snake and
odious serpent! thou contaminator of my race!"

Melusina's former anxiety was now verified, and the evil that had lain
so long in ambush had now fearfully sprung on him and her. At these
reproaches she fainted away; and when at length she revived, full of the
profoundest grief, she declared to him that she must now depart from
him, and, in obedience to a decree of destiny, fleet about the earth in
pain and suffering, as a spectre, until the day of doom; and that only
when one of her race was to die at Lusignan would she become visible.

Her words at parting were these:

"But one thing will I say unto thee before I part, that thou, and
those who for more than a hundred years shall succeed thee, shall know
that whenever I am seen to hover over the fair castle of Lusignan,
then will it be certain that in that very year the castle will get a
new lord; and though people may not perceive me in the air, yet they
will see me by the Fountain of Thirst; and thus shall it be so long as
the castle stands in honour and flourishing--especially on the Friday
before the lord of the castle shall die." Immediately, with wailing
and loud lamentation, she left the castle of Lusignan,[562] and has
ever since existed as a spectre of the night. Raymond died as a hermit
on Monserrat.

The president de Boissieu says,[563] that she chose for her retreat
one of the mountains of Sassenage, near Grenoble, on account of
certain vats that are there, and to which she communicated a virtue
which makes them, at this day, one of the seven wonders of Dauphiné.
They are two in number, of great beauty, and so admirably cut in the
rock, that it is easy to see they are not the work of unaided nature.
The virtue which Melusina communicated to them was, that of
announcing, by the water they contain, the abundance or scantiness of
the crops. When there is to be an abundant harvest, it rises over the
edges, and overflows; in middling years, the vats are but half full;
and when the crops are to fail, they are quite dry. One of these vats
is consecrated to corn, the other to wine.

The popular belief was strong in France that she used to appear on
what was called the tower of Melusina as often as any of the lords of
the race of Lusignan was to die; and that when the family was extinct,
and the castle had fallen to the crown, she was seen whenever a king
of France was to depart this life. Mézeray informs us that he was
assured of the truth of the appearance of Melusina on this tower
previous to the death of a Lusignan, or a king of France, by people of
reputation, and who were not by any means credulous. She appeared in a
mourning dress, and continued for a long time to utter the most
heart-piercing lamentation.

The following passage occurs in Brantôme's Eloge of the Duke of
Montpensier, who in 1574 destroyed Lusignan, and several other
retreats of the Huguenots:

"I heard, more than forty years ago, an old veteran say, that when the
Emperor Charles V. came to France, they brought him by Lusignan for
the sake of the recreation of hunting the deer, which were there in
great abundance in fine old parks of France; that he was never tired
admiring and praising the beauty, the size, and the chef d'oeuvre of
that house, built, which is more, by such a lady, of whom he made them
tell him several fabulous tales, which are there quite common, even to
the good old women who washed their linen at the fountain, whom Queen
Catherine of Medicis, mother to the king, would also question and
listen to. Some told her that they used sometimes to see her come to
the fountain to bathe in it, in the form of a most beautiful woman,
and in the dress of a widow. Others said that they used to see her,
but very rarely, and that on Saturday evening, (for in that state she
did not let herself be seen,) bathing, half her body being that of a
very beautiful lady, the other half ending in a snake: others, that
she used to appear a-top of the great tower in a very beautiful form,
and as a snake. Some said, that when any great disaster was to come on
the kingdom, or a change of reign, or a death, or misfortune among her
relatives, who were the greatest people of France, and were kings,
that three days before she was heard to cry, with a cry most shrill
and terrible, three times.

"This is held to be perfectly true. Several persons of that place, who
have heard it, are positive of it, and hand it from father to son; and
say that, even when the siege came on, many soldiers and men of honour
who were there affirmed it. But it was when the order was given to
throw down and destroy her castles that she uttered her loudest cries
and wails. This is perfectly true, according to the saying of people
of honour. Since then she has not been heard. Some old wives, however,
say she has appeared to them, but very rarely."

Jean d'Arras declares that Serville, who defended the castle of Lusignan
for the English against the Duke of Berri, swore to that prince, upon
his faith and honour, "that, three days before the surrender of the
fortress, there entered into his chamber, though the doors were shut, a
large serpent, enamelled with white and blue, which came and struck its
tail several times against the feet of the bed where he was lying with
his wife, who was not at all frightened at it, though he was very much
so; and that when he seized his sword, the serpent changed all at once
into a woman, and said to him, _How, Serville, you who have been at so
many sieges and battles, are you afraid! Know that I am the mistress of
this castle, which I have built, and that you must surrender it very
soon._ When she had ended these words she resumed her serpent-shape, and
glided away so swiftly that he could not perceive her." The author adds,
that the prince told him that other credible people had sworn to him
that they too had seen her at the same time in other places in the
neighbourhood, and in the same form.

       *       *       *       *       *