
The old castle of Pirou, on the coast of the Cotentin, in Lower
Normandy, likewise owes its origin to the Fées.[564] These were the
daughters of a great lord of the country, who was a celebrated
magician. They built the castle long before the time of the invasions
of the Northmen, and dwelt there in peace and unity. But when these
pirates began to make their descents on the coast, the Fées, fearing
their violence, changed themselves into wild geese, and thus set them
at defiance. They did not, however, altogether abandon their castle;
for the elders of the place assert that every year, on the first of
March, a flock of wild geese returns to take possession of the nests
they had hollowed out for themselves in its walls. It was also said
that when a male child was born to the illustrious house of Pirou, the
males of these geese, displaying their finest grey plumage, strutted
about on the pavement in the courts of the castle; while, if it was a
girl, the females, in plumage whiter than snow, took precedence then
over the males. If the new-born maiden was to be a nun, it was
remarked that one of them did not join with the rest, but kept alone
in a corner, eating little, and deeply sighing.

The following traditions are attached to the castles of Argouges and
Rânes, in Normandy:--[565]

One of the lords of Argouges, when out hunting one day, met a bevy of
twenty ladies of rare beauty, all mounted on palfreys white as the
driven snow. One of them appeared to be their queen, and the lord of
Argouges became all at once so deeply enamoured of her, that he
offered on the spot to marry her. This lady was _fée_; she had for a
long time past secretly protected the Sire d'Argouges, and even caused
him to come off victorious in a combat with a terrible giant. As she
loved the object of her care, she willingly accepted his troth, but
under the express condition that he should never pronounce in her
presence the name of Death. So light a condition caused no
difficulty; the marriage took place under the happiest auspices, and
lovely children crowned their union. The fatal word was never heard,
and their happiness seemed without alloy. It came to pass, however,
one day at length, that the wedded pair were preparing to give their
presence at a tournament. The lady was long at her toilet, and her
husband waited for her with impatience. At length she made her
appearance. "Fair dame," said he, when he saw her, "you would be a
good person to send to fetch Death; for you take long enough to
perform what you are about."[566] Hardly had he pronounced the fatal
word when, uttering a piercing cry, as if actually struck by death,
the Fée lady disappeared, leaving the mark of her hand on the gate.
She comes every night clad in a white robe, and wanders round and
round the castle, uttering deep and continuous groans, amid which may
be heard, in funereal notes, _Death! Death!_[567]

The same legend, as we have said, adheres to the castle of Rânes,
where, however, it was on the top of a tower that the Fée vanished,
leaving, like Melusina, the mark of her foot on the battlements, where
it is still to be seen.

In explication of the former legend, M. Pluque observes, that at the
siege of Bayeux by Henry I., in 1106, Robert d'Argouges vanquished in
single combat a German of huge stature; and that the crest of the
house of Argouges is Faith, under the form of a woman naked to the
waist, seated in a bark, with the motto, or war-cry, _A la Fé!_ (i. e.
_à la foi!_) which the people pronounce _A la Fée!_

       *       *       *       *       *

So far the genuine French Fées. On the revival of learning they appear
to have fallen into neglect, till the memory of them was awakened by
the appearance of the translation of the Italian tales of Straparola,
many of which seem to have become current among the people; and in the
end of the seventeenth century, the Contes des Fées of Perrault,
Madame d'Aulnoy, and their imitators and successors, gave them vogue
throughout Europe. These tales are too well known to our readers to
require us to make any observations on them.
