
The following is the Polish form of a legend which we have already met
with in several places:[577]

There came to a nobleman an unknown man, who called himself Iskrzycki
(_spark_ or _firestone_), and offered to engage in his service. The
contract was drawn up and signed, when the master perceived that
Iskrzycki had horse's hoofs, and he accordingly wanted to break off the
agreement; but the servant stood on his right, and declared that he
would enter on his duties, even against his master's will. From this
time forwards he took up his abode invisibly in the stove, and performed
all the tasks set him. People gradually grew accustomed to him, but at
last the lady prevailed on her lord to remove, and he hired another
estate. His people left the castle, and they had already gone the
greater part of the way, when on a bad part of the road the carriage was
near turning over, and the lady gave a loud cry of terror. Immediately a
voice answered from behind the carriage--"Never fear! Iskrzycki is with
you!" The lord and his lady now saw that there was no way of getting rid
of him, so they went back to the old house, and lived there on good
terms with their servant till the term of the engagement had arrived.

The Servian ballads, that have lately appeared,[578] have made us
acquainted with an interesting species of beings called Vilas. These
are represented as mountain-nymphs, young and beautiful, clad in
white, with long flying hair. Their voice is said to resemble that of
the woodpecker. They shoot, according to popular belief, deadly arrows
at men, and sometimes carry off children, whom their mothers in their
anger have consigned to them or the devil: yet the general character
of the Vilas is to injure none but those who intrude upon their
_kolos_, or roundels.

The Vilas sometimes appear gaily dancing their kolos beneath the
branches of the Vishnia or Vistula cherry; sometimes a Vila is
introduced comforting the sorrows of an enamoured deer; at other times
collecting storms in the heavens;[579] now foretelling to a hero his
impending death;[580] now ruthlessly casting down each night the walls
of a rising fortress, till a young and lovely female is immured within
them.[581] She usually rides a seven-year old hart, with a bridle made
of snakes.

The following are specimens of these Servian ballads:

