                                             BROWN.


During the sixteenth century the study of classical literature, which
opened a new field to imagination, and gave it a new impulse, was
eagerly and vigorously pursued. A classic ardour was widely and
extensively diffused. The compositions of that age incessantly imitate
and allude to the beauties and incidents of the writings of ancient
Greece and Rome.

Yet amid this diffusion of classic taste and knowledge, romance had by
no means lost its influence. The black-letter pages of Lancelot du
Lac, Perceforest, Mort d'Arthur, and the other romances of chivalry,
were still listened to with solemn attention, when on winter-evenings
the family of the good old knight or baron 'crowded round the ample
fire,' to hear them made vocal, and probably no small degree of
credence was given to the wonders they recorded. The passion for
allegory, too, remained unabated. Fine moral webs were woven from the
fragile threads of the Innamorato and the Furioso; and even Tasso was
obliged, in compliance with the reigning taste, to extract an allegory
from his divine poem; which Fairfax, when translating the Jerusalem,
was careful to preserve. Spenser, therefore, when desirous of
consecrating his genius to the celebration of the glories of the
maiden reign, and the valiant warriors and grave statesmen who adorned
it, had his materials ready prepared. Fairy-land, as described by the
romancers, gave him a scene; the knights and dames with whom it was
peopled, actors; and its court, its manners, and usages, a facility of
transferring thither whatever real events might suit his design.

It is not easy to say positively to what romance the poet was chiefly
indebted for his Faery-land. We might, perhaps, venture to conjecture
that his principal authority was Huon de Bordeaux, which had been
translated some time before by Lord Berners, and from which it is most
likely that Shakespeare took his Oberon, who was thus removed from the
realms of romance, and brought back among his real kindred, the dwarfs
or elves. Spenser, it is evident, was acquainted with this romance,
for he says of Sir Guyon,

        He was an elfin born of noble state
        And mickle worship in his native land;
        Well could he tourney and in lists debate,
        And knighthood took of good _Sir Huon's_ hand,
      When with King Oberon he came to Fairy-land.
                                            B. ii. c. 1. st. vi.

And here, if such a thing were to be heeded, the poet commits an
anachronism in making Sir Huon, who slew the son of Charlemagne, a
contemporary of Arthur.

Where "this delightful land of Faery" lies, it were as idle to seek as
for Oberon's realm of Mommur, the island of Calypso, or the kingdom of
Lilliput. Though it shadow forth England, it is distinct from it; for
Cleopolis excels Troynovant in greatness and splendour, and Elfin, the
first Fairy king, ruled over India and America. To the curious the
poet says,

      Of Faery-lond yet if he more inquire,
      By certain signes here sett in sondrie place,
      He may it fynd, ne let him then admyre,
      But yield his sence to be too blunt and bace,
      That no'te without an hound fine footing trace.

The idea of making a queen sole regnante of Fairy-land was the necessary
result of the plan of making "the fayrest princesse under sky" view her
"owne realmes in lond of faery." Yet there may have been sage authority
for this settlement of the fairy throne. Some old romancers may have
spoken only of a queen; and the gallant Sir Thopas does not seem to
apprehend that he is in pursuit of the wedded wife of another. This
doughty champion's dream was evidently the original of Arthur's.

        Forwearied with my sportes, I did alight
        From loftie steede, and downe to sleepe me layd;
        The verdant grass my couch did goodly dight,
        And pillow was my helmett fayre displayd;
        Whiles every sence the humour sweet embayd,
        Me seemed by my side a royall mayd
        Her dainty limbes full softly down did lay,
      So faire a creature yet saw never sunny day.

        Most goodly glee and lovely blandishment
        She to me made, and badd me love her deare,
        For dearly, sure, her love was to me bent,
        As, when iust time expired, should appeare:
        But whether dreames delude, or true it were,
        Was never hart so ravisht with delight,
        Ne living man such wordes did never heare
        As she to me delivered all that night,
      And at her parting said, she queen of Faries hight.
