
        From that day forth I cast in carefull mynd
        To seek her out with labor and long tyne,
        And never vow to rest till her I fynd--
      Nyne months I seek in vain, yet n'ill that vow unbynd,
                                      B. i. c. 9. st. xiii., xiv., xv.

The names given by Spenser to these beings are Fays (_Feés_), Farys or
Fairies, Elfes and Elfins, of which last words the former had been
already employed by Chaucer, and in one passage it is difficult to say
what class of beings is intended. Spenser's account of the origin of his
Fairies is evidently mere invention, as nothing in the least resembling
it is to be found in any preceding writer. It bears, indeed, some slight
and distant analogy to that of the origin of the inhabitants of
Jinnestân, as narrated by the Orientals. According to the usual practice
of Spenser, it is mixed up with the fables of antiquity.

                      Prometheus did create
      A man of many parts from beasts deryved;

        That man so made he called Elfe, to weet,
        Quick,[87] the first author of all Elfin kynd,
        Who, wandring through the world with wearie feet,
        Did in the gardins of Adonis fynd
        A goodly creature, whom he deemed in mynd
        To be no earthly wight, but either spright
        Or angell, the authour of all woman-kynd;
        Therefore a Fay he her according hight,
      Of whom all Faryes spring, and fetch their lignage right.

        Of these a mighty people shortly grew,
        And puissant kings, which all the world warrayd,
        And to themselves all nations did subdue.
                               B. ii. c. 9. st. lxx., lxxi., lxxii.

Sir Walter Scott remarks with justice (though his memory played him
somewhat false on the occasion), that "the stealing of the Red Cross
Knight while a child, is the only incident in the poem which
approaches to the popular character of the Fairy." It is not exactly
the _only_ incident; but the only other, that of Arthegal, is a
precisely parallel one:--

        He wonneth in the land of Fayëree,
        Yet is no Fary born, ne sib at all
        To Elfes, but sprung of seed terrestriall,
        And whyleome by false Faries stolne away,
        Whyles yet in infant cradle he did crall:
        Ne other to himself is knowne this day,
      But that he by an Elfe was gotten of a Fay.
                                     B. iii. c. 3. st. xxvi.

Sir Walter has been duly animadverted on for this dangerous error by
the erudite Mr. Todd. It would be as little becoming as politic in us,
treading, as we do, on ground where error ever hovers around us, to
make any remark. Freedom from misconception and mistake,
unfortunately, forms no privilege of our nature.

We must here observe, that Spenser was extremely injudicious in his
selection of the circumstances by which he endeavoured to confound the
two classes of Fairies. It was quite incongruous to style the progeny
of the subjects of Gloriane a "base elfin brood," or themselves "false
Fairies," especially when we recollect that such a being as Belphoebe
whose

                     whole creation did her show
      Pure and unspotted from all loathly crime,
      That is ingenerate in fleshly slime,

was born of a Fairie.

Our poet seems to have forgotten himself also in the Legend of Sir
Calidore; for though the knight is a Faerie himself, and though such
we are to suppose were all the native inhabitants of Faerie-land, yet
to the "gentle flood" that tumbled down from Mount Acidale,

                        ne mote the ruder clown
      Thereto approach ne filth mote therein drown;
      But Nymphs and Faeries on the banks did sit
      In the woods shade which did the waters crown.
                                       B. vi. c. 10. st. vii.

And a little farther, when Calidore gazes on the "hundred naked
maidens lily white," that danced around the Graces, he wist not

      Whether it were the train of beauty's queen,
      Or Nymphs or Faeries, or enchanted show,
      With which his eyes mote have deluded been.--St. xvii.

The popular Elves, who dance their circlets on the green, were
evidently here in Spenser's mind.[88]

It is now, we think, if not certain, at least highly probable, that
the Fairy-land and the Fairies of Spenser are those of romance, to
which the term Fairy properly belongs, and that it is without just
reason that the title of his poem has been styled a _misnomer_.[89]
After the appearance of his Faerie Queene, all distinction between the
different species was rapidly lost, and Fairies became the established
name of the popular Elves.

Here, then, we will take our leave of the potent ladies of romance,
and join the Elves of the popular creed, tracing their descent from
the Duergar of northern mythology, till we meet them enlivening the
cottage fireside with the tales of their pranks and gambols.
