                               TEGNER.

      A song of Vallhall's bright abodes,
      Of all the goddesses and gods.


The ancient religion of Scandinavia, and probably of the whole
Gotho-German race, consisted, like all other systems devised by man,
in personifications of the various powers of nature and faculties of
mind. Of this system in its fulness and perfection we possess no
record. It is only from the poems of the elder or poetic Edda,[90]
from the narratives of the later or prose Edda and the various Sagas
or histories written in the Icelandic language,[91] that we can obtain
any knowledge of it.

The poetic or Sæmund's Edda was, as is generally believed, collected
about the end of the eleventh or beginning of the twelfth century by an
Icelander named Sæmund, and styled Hinns Fròda, or The Wise. It consists
of a number of mythological and historical songs, the production of the
ancient Scalds or poets, all, or the greater part, composed before the
introduction of Christianity into the north. The measure of these
venerable songs is alliterative rime, and they present not unfrequently
poetic beauties of a high and striking character.[92]

The prose Edda is supposed to have been compiled in the thirteenth
century by Snorro Sturleson, the celebrated historian of Norway. It is
a history of the gods and their actions formed from the songs of the
poetic Edda, and from other ancient poems, several stanzas of which
are incorporated in it. Beside the preface and conclusion, it consists
of two principal parts, the first consisting of the Gylfa-ginning
(_Gylfa's Deception_), or Hárs Lygi (_Hár's_ i. e. _Odin's Fiction_),
and the Braga-rædur (_Braga's Narrative_), each of which is divided
into several Dæmi-sagas or Illustrative Stories; and the second named
the Kenningar or list of poetic names and periphrases.[93]

The Gylfa-ginning narrates that Gylfa king of Sweden, struck with the
wisdom and power of the Æser,[94] as Odin and his followers were
called, journeyed in the likeness of an old man, and under the assumed
name of Ganglar, to Asgard their chief residence, to inquire into and
fathom their wisdom. Aware of his design, the Æser by their magic art
caused to arise before him a lofty and splendid palace, roofed with
golden shields. At the gate he found a man who was throwing up and
catching swords, seven of which were in the air at one time. This man
inquires the name of the stranger, whom he leads into the palace,
where Ganglar sees a number of persons drinking and playing, and three
thrones, each set higher than the other. On the thrones sat Har
(_High_), Jafnhar (_Equal-high_), and Thridi (_Third_). Ganglar asks
if there is any one there wise and learned. Har replies that he will
not depart in safety if he knows more than they.[95] Ganglar then
commences his interrogations, which embrace a variety of recondite
subjects, and extend from the creation to the end of all things. To
each he receives a satisfactory reply. At the last reply Ganglar hears
a loud rush and noise: the magic illusion suddenly vanishes, and he
finds himself alone on an extensive plain.

The Braga-rædur is the discourse of Braga to Ægir, the god of the sea,
at the banquet of the Immortals. This part contains many tales of gods
and heroes old, whose adventures had been sung by Skalds, of high
renown and lofty genius.

Though both the Eddas were compiled by Christians, there appears to be
very little reason for suspecting the compilers of having falsified or
interpolated the mythology of their forefathers. Sæmund's Edda may be
regarded as an Anthology of ancient Scandinavian poetry; and the
author of the prose Edda (who it is plain did not always understand
the true meaning of the tales he related) wrote it as a northern
Pantheon and Gradus ad Parnassum, to supply poets with incidents,
ornaments, and epithets. Fortunately they did so, or impenetrable
darkness had involved the ancient religion of the Gothic stock!

Beside the Eddas, much information is to be derived from the various
Sagas or northern histories. These Sagas, at times transmitting true
historical events, at other times containing the wildest fictions of
romance, preserve much valuable mythic lore, and the Ynglinga,
Volsunga, Hervarar, and other Sagas, will furnish many important
traits of northern mythology.

It is not intended here to attempt sounding the depths of Eddaic
mythology, a subject so obscure, and concerning which so many and
various opinions occur in the works of those who have occupied
themselves with it. Suffice it to observe that it goes back to the
most remote ages, and that two essential parts of it are the Alfar
(_Alfs_ or _Elves_) and the Duergar (_Dwarfs_), two classes of beings
whose names continue to the present day in all the languages of the
nations descended from the Gotho-German race.

"Our heathen forefathers," says Thorlacius,[96] "believed, like the
Pythagoreans, and the farther back in antiquity the more firmly, that
the whole world was filled with spirits of various kinds, to whom they
ascribed in general the same nature and properties as the Greeks did
to their Dæmons. These were divided into the Celestial and the
Terrestrial, from their places of abode. The former were, according
to the ideas of those times, of a good and elevated nature, and of a
friendly disposition toward men, whence they also received the name of
White or Light Alfs or Spirits. The latter, on the contrary, who were
classified after their abodes in air, sea, and earth, were not
regarded in so favourable a light. It was believed that they,
particularly the _land ones_, the [Greek: daimones epichthonioi] of
the Greeks, constantly and on all occasions sought to torment or
injure mankind, and that they had their dwelling partly on the earth
in great thick woods, whence came the name Skovtrolde[97] (_Wood
Trolls_), or in other desert and lonely places, partly in and under
the ground, or in rocks and hills; these last were called Bjerg-Trolde
(_Hill Trolls_): to the first, on account of their different nature,
was given the name of Dverge (_Dwarfs_), and Alve, whence the word
Ellefolk, which is still in the Danish language. These Dæmons,
particularly the underground ones, were called Svartálfar, that is
Black Spirits, and inasmuch as they did mischief, Trolls."

This very nearly coincides with what is to be found in the Edda,
except that there would appear to be some foundation for a distinction
between the Dwarfs and the Dark Alfs.[98]

