                                ELVES.

      Säg, kännar du Elfvornas glada slägt?
        De bygga ved flodernas rand;
      De spinna af månsken sin högtidsdrägt,
        Med liljehvit spelande hand.
                                      STAGNELIUS.

      Say, knowest thou the Elves' gay and joyous race?
        The banks of streams are their home;
      They spin of the moonshine their holiday-dress,
        With their lily-white hands frolicsome.


The Alfar still live in the memory and traditions of the peasantry of
Scandinavia. They also, to a certain extent, retain their distinction
into White and Black. The former, or the Good Elves, dwell in the air,
dance on the grass, or sit in the leaves of trees; the latter, or Evil
Elves, are regarded as an underground people, who frequently inflict
sickness or injury on mankind; for which there is a particular kind of
doctors called _Kloka män_,[128] to be met with in all parts of the
country.

The Elves are believed to have their kings, and to celebrate their
weddings and banquets, just the same as the dwellers above ground. There
is an interesting intermediate class of them in popular tradition called
the Hill-people (_Högfolk_), who are believed to dwell in caves and
small hills: when they show themselves they have a handsome human form.
The common people seem to connect with them a deep feeling of
melancholy, as if bewailing a half-quenched hope of redemption.[129]

There are only a few old persons now who can tell any thing more about
them than of the sweet singing that may occasionally on summer nights
be heard out of their hills, when one stands still and listens, or, as
it is expressed in the ballads, "lays his ear to the Elve-hill"
(_lägger sitt öra till Elfvehögg_): but no one must be so cruel as, by
the slightest word, to destroy their hopes of salvation, for then the
spritely music will be turned into weeping and lamentation.[130]

The Norwegians call the Elves Huldrafolk, and their music Huldraslaat:
it is in the minor key, and of a dull and mournful sound. The
mountaineers sometimes play it, and pretend they have learned it by
listening to the underground people among the hills and rocks. There
is also a tune called the Elf-king's tune, which several of the good
fiddlers know right well, but never venture to play, for as soon as it
begins both old and young, and even inanimate objects, are impelled to
dance, and the player cannot stop unless he can play the air
backwards, or that some one comes behind him and cuts the strings of
his fiddle.[131]

The little underground Elves, who are believed to dwell under the
houses of mankind, are described as sportive and mischievous, and as
imitating all the actions of men. They are said to love cleanliness
about the house and place, and to reward such servants as are neat and
cleanly.

There was one time, it is said, a servant girl, who was for her cleanly,
tidy habits, greatly beloved by the Elves, particularly as she was
careful to carry away all dirt and foul water to a distance from the
house, and they once invited her to a wedding. Every thing was conducted
in the greatest order, and they made her a present of some chips, which
she took good-humouredly and put into her pocket. But when the
bride-pair was coming there was a straw unluckily lying in the way, the
bridegroom got cleverly over it, but the poor bride fell on her face. At
the sight of this the girl could not restrain herself, but burst out
a-laughing, and that instant the whole vanished from her sight. Next
day, to her utter amazement, she found that what she had taken to be
nothing but chips, were so many pieces of pure gold.[132]

A dairy-maid at a place called Skibshuset (_the Ship-house_), in Odense,
was not so fortunate. A colony of Elves had taken up their abode under
the floor of the cowhouse, or it is more likely, were there before it
was made a cowhouse. However, the dirt and filth that the cattle made
annoyed them beyond measure, and they gave the dairy-maid to understand
that if she did not remove the cows, she would have reason to repent it.
She gave little heed to their representations; and it was not very long
till they set her up on top of the hay-rick, and killed all the cows. It
is said that they were seen on the same night removing in a great hurry
from the cowhouse down to the meadow, and that they went in little
coaches; and their king was in the first coach, which was far more
stately and magnificent than the rest. They have ever since lived in the
meadow.[133]

The Elves are extremely fond of dancing in the meadows, where they form
those circles of a livelier green which from them are called Elf-dance
(_Elfdans_). When the country people see in the morning stripes along
the dewy grass in the woods and meadows, they say the Elves have been
dancing there. If any one should at midnight get within their circle,
they become visible to him, and they may then illude him. It is not
every one that can see the Elves; and one person may see them dancing
while another perceives nothing. Sunday children, as they are called,
_i. e._ those born on Sunday, are remarkable for possessing this
property of seeing Elves and similar beings. The Elves, however, have
the power to bestow this gift on whomsoever they please. People also
used to speak of Elf-books which they gave to those whom they loved, and
which enabled them to foretell future events.

The Elves often sit in little stones that are of a circular form, and
are called Elf-mills (_Elf-quärnor_); the sound of their voice is said
to be sweet and soft like the air.[134]

The Danish peasantry give the following account of their Ellefolk or
Elve-people.

The Elle-people live in the Elle-moors. The appearance of the man is
that of an old man with a low-crowned hat on his head; the Elle-woman
is young and of a fair and attractive countenance, but behind she is
hollow like a dough-trough. Young men should be especially on their
guard against her, for it is very difficult to resist her; and she
has, moreover, a stringed instrument, which, when she plays on it,
quite ravishes their hearts. The man may be often seen near the
Elle-moors, bathing himself in the sunbeams, but if any one comes too
near him, he opens his mouth wide and breathes upon them, and his
breath produces sickness and pestilence. But the women are most
frequently to be seen by moonshine; then they dance their rounds in
the high grass so lightly and so gracefully, that they seldom meet a
denial when they offer their hand to a rash young man. It is also
necessary to watch cattle, that they may not graze in any place where
the Elle-people have been; for if any animal come to a place where
the Elle-people have spit, or done what is worse, it is attacked by
some grievous disease which can only be cured by giving it to eat a
handful of St. John's wort, which had been pulled at twelve o'clock on
St. John's night. It might also happen that they might sustain some
injury by mixing with the Elle-people's cattle, which are very large,
and of a blue colour, and which may sometimes be seen in the fields
licking up the dew, on which they live. But the farmer has an easy
remedy against this evil; for he has only to go to the Elle-hill when
he is turning out his cattle and to say, "Thou little Troll! may I
graze my cows on thy hill?" And if he is not prohibited, he may set
his mind at rest.[135]

The following ballads and tales will fully justify what has been said
respecting the tone of melancholy connected with the subject of the
Elves.[136]

