
According to Danish tradition, the Elle-kings, under the denomination
of Promontory-kings, (_Klintekonger_), keep watch and ward over the
country. Whenever war, or any other misfortune, threatens to come on
the land, there may be seen, on the promontory, complete armies, drawn
up in array to defend the country.

One of these kings resides at Möen, on the spot which still bears the
name of King's-hill (_Kongsbjerg_). His queen is the most beautiful
of beings, and she dwells at the Queen's Chair (_Dronningstolen_).
This king is a great friend of the king of Stevns, and they are both
at enmity with Grap, the promontory-king of Rügen, who must keep at a
distance, and look out over the sea to watch their approach.

Another tradition, however, says, that there is but one king, who
rules over the headlands of Möen, Stevns, and Rügen. He has a
magnificent chariot, which is drawn by four black horses. In this he
drives over the sea, from one promontory to another. At such times the
sea grows black, and is in great commotion, and the loud snorting and
neighing of his horses may be distinctly heard.[145]

It was once believed that no mortal monarch dare come to Stevns; for
the Elle-king would not permit him to cross the stream that bounds it.
But Christian IV. passed it without opposition, and since his time
several Danish monarchs have been there.

At Skjelskör, in Zealand, reigns another of these jealous promontorial
sovereigns, named king Tolv (_Twelve_). He will not suffer a mortal
prince to pass the bridge of Kjelskör. Wo, too, betide the watchman who
should venture to cry twelve o'clock in the village, he might chance to
find himself transported to the village of Borre or to the Windmills.

Old people that have eyes for such things, declare they frequently see
Kong Tolv rolling himself on the grass in the sunshine. On New-year's
night he takes from one smith's forge or another nine new shoes for
his horses; they must be always left ready for him, and with them the
necessary complement of nails.

The Elle-king of Bornholm[146] lets himself be occasionally heard with
fife and drum, especially when war is at hand; he may then be seen in
the fields with his soldiers. This king will not suffer an earthly
monarch to pass more than three nights on his isle.

In the popular creed there is some strange connexion between the Elves
and the trees. They not only frequent them, but they make an
interchange of form with them. In the church-yard of Store
Heddinge,[147] in Zealand, there are the remains of an oak wood.
These, say the common people, are the Elle-king's soldiers; by day
they are trees, by night valiant warriors. In the wood of Rugaard, in
the same island, is a tree which by night becomes a whole Elle-people,
and goes about all alive. It has no leaves upon it, yet it would be
very unsafe to go to break or fell it, for the underground-people
frequently hold their meetings under its branches. There is, in
another place, an elder-tree growing in a farm-yard, which frequently
takes a walk in the twilight about the yard, and peeps in through the
window at the children when they are alone.

It was, perhaps, these elder-trees that gave origin to the notion. In
Danish _Hyld_ or _Hyl_--a word not far removed from Elle--is Elder,
and the peasantry believe that in or under the elder-tree dwells a
being called Hyldemoer (_Elder-mother_), or Hyldequinde
(_Elder-woman_), with her ministrant spirits.[148] A Danish peasant,
if he wanted to take any part of an elder-tree, used previously to
say, three times--"O, Hyldemoer, Hyldemoer! let me take some of thy
elder, and I will let thee take something of mine in return." If this
was omitted he would be severely punished. They tell of a man who cut
down an elder-tree, but he soon after died suddenly. It is, moreover,
not prudent to have any furniture made of elder-wood. A child was once
put to lie in a cradle made of this wood, but Hyldemoer came and
pulled it by the legs, and gave it no rest till it was put to sleep
elsewhere. Old David Monrad relates, that a shepherd, one night, heard
his three children crying, and when he inquired the cause, they said
some one had been sucking them. Their breasts were found to be
swelled, and they were removed to another room, where they were quiet.
The reason is said to have been that that room was floored with elder.

The linden or lime tree is the favourite haunt of the Elves and
cognate beings; and it is not safe to be near it after sunset.[149]
