                           DWARFS OR TROLLS

      Ther bygde folk i the bärg,
      Quinnor och män, för mycken duerf.
                     HIST. ALEX. MAC. _Suedice._

      Within the hills folk did won,
      Women and men, dwarfs many a one.


The more usual appellation of the Dwarfs is Troll or Trold,[150] a
word originally significant of any evil spirit,[151] giant monster,
magician,[152] or evil person; but now in a good measure divested of
its ill senses, for the Trolls are not in general regarded as noxious
or malignant beings.

The Trolls are represented as dwelling inside of hills, mounds, and
hillocks--whence they are also called Hill-people
(_Bjergfolk_)--sometimes in single families, sometimes in societies. In
the ballads they are described as having kings over them, but never so
in the popular legend. Their character seems gradually to have sunk down
to the level of the peasantry, in proportion as the belief in them was
consigned to the same class. They are regarded as extremely rich for
when, on great occasions of festivity, they have their hills raised up
on red pillars, people that have chanced to be passing by have seen them
shoving large chests full of money to and fro, and opening and clapping
down the lids of them. Their hill-dwellings are very magnificent inside.
"They live," said one of Mr. Arndt's guides, "in fine houses of gold and
crystal. My father saw them once in the night, when the hill was open on
St. John's night. They were dancing and drinking, and it seemed to him
as if they were making signs to him to go to them, but his horse
snorted, and carried him away, whether he would or no. There is a great
number of them in the Guldberg (_Goldhill_), and they have brought into
it all the gold and silver that people buried in the great Russian
war."[153]

They are obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and
elsewise keeping up a friendly intercourse with mankind. But they have
a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions, but even
women and children.

They marry, have children, bake and brew, just as the peasant himself
does. A farmer one day met a hill-man and his wife, and a whole squad
of stumpy little children, in his fields;[154] and people used often
to see the children of the man who lived in the hill of Kund, in
Jutland, climbing up the hill, and rolling down after one another,
with shouts of laughter.

The Trolls have a great dislike to noise, probably from a recollection
of the time when Thor used to be flinging his hammer after them; so
that the hanging of bells in the churches has driven them almost all
out of the country. The people of Ebeltoft were once sadly plagued by
them, as they plundered their pantries in a most unconscionable
manner; so they consulted a very wise and pious man; and his advice
was, that they should hang a bell in the steeple of the church. They
did so, and they were soon eased of the Trolls.[155]

These beings have some very extraordinary and useful properties; they
can, for instance, go about invisibly,[156] or turn themselves into
any shape; they can foresee future events; they can confer prosperity,
or the contrary, on a family; they can bestow bodily strength on any
one; and, in short, perform numerous feats beyond the power of man.

Of personal beauty they have not much to boast: the Ebeltoft Dwarfs,
mentioned above, were often seen, and they had immoderate humps on
their backs, and long crooked noses. They were dressed in gray
jackets,[157] and they wore pointed red caps. Old people in Zealand
say, that when the Trolls were in the country, they used to go from
their hill to the village of Gudmandstrup through the Stone-meadow,
and that people, when passing that way, used to meet great tall men in
long black clothes. Some have foolishly spoken to them, and wished
them good evening, but they never got any other answer than that the
Trolls hurried past them, saying, Mi! mi! mi! mi!

Thanks to the industry of Mr. Thiele, who has been indefatigable in
collecting the traditions of his native country, we are furnished with
ample accounts of the Trolls; and the following legends will fully
illustrate what we have written concerning them.[158]

We commence with the Swedish ballads of the Hill-kings, as in dignity
and antiquity they take precedence of the legends.


