                          _Svend Faelling._

Svend Fælling was a valiant champion. He was born in Fælling, and was
a long time at service in Aakjær house, Aarhuus, and as the roads were
at that time greatly infested by Trolls and underground-people, who
bore great enmity to all Christians, Svend undertook the office of
letter-carrier.

As he was one time going along the road, he saw approaching him the
Troll of Jels-hill, on the lands of Holm. The Troll came up to him,
begging him to stand his friend in a combat with the Troll of
Borum-es-hill. When Svend Fælling had promised to do so, saying that
he thought himself strong and active enough for the encounter, the
Troll reached him a heavy iron bar, and bade him show his strength on
that. But not all Svend's efforts availed to lift it: whereupon the
Troll handed him a horn, telling him to drink out of it. No sooner had
he drunk a little out of it than his strength increased. He was now
able to lift the bar, which, when he had drunk again, became still
lighter; but when again renewing his draught he emptied the horn, he
was able to swing the bar with ease, and he then learned from the
Troll that he had now gotten the strength of twelve men. He then
promised to prepare himself for combat with the Troll of Bergmond. As
a token he was told that he should meet on the road a black ox and a
red ox, and that he should fall with all his might on the black ox,
and drive him from the red one.

This all came to pass just as he was told, and he found, after his work
was done, that the black ox was the Troll from Borum-es-hill, and the
red ox was the Troll himself of Jels-hill, who, as a reward for the
assistance he had given him, allowed him to retain for his own use the
twelve men's strength with which he had endowed him. This grant was,
however, on this condition--that if ever he should reveal the secret of
his strength, he should be punished by getting the appetite of twelve.

The fame of the prodigious strength of Svend soon spread through the
country, as he distinguished himself by various exploits, such, for
instance, as throwing a dairy-maid, who had offended him, up on the
gable of the house, and similar feats. So when this report came to the
ears of his master, he had Svend called before him, and inquired of him
whence his great strength came. Svend recollected the words of his
friend the Troll, so he told him if he would promise him as much food as
would satisfy twelve men, he would tell him. The master promised, and
Svend told his story; but the word of the Troll was accomplished, for
from that day forth Svend ate and drank as much as any twelve.[195]

