                                  FINN MAGNUSEN

      And Witches, Trolls, and Nisses in each nook.


The Nis is the same being that is called Kobold in Germany, Brownie in
Scotland, and whom we shall meet in various other places under
different appellations. He is in Denmark and Norway also called Nisse
god-dreng (_Nissè good lad_), and in Sweden Tomtgubbe (_Old Man of the
House_), or briefly Tomte.

He is evidently of the Dwarf family, as he resembles them in appearance,
and, like them, has the command of money, and the same dislike to noise
and tumult. He is of the size of a year-old child, but has the face of
an old man. His usual dress is grey, with a pointed red cap; but on
Michaelmas-day he wears a round hat like those of the peasants.

No farm-house goes on well unless there is a Nis in it, and well is it
for the maids and the men when they are in favour with him. They may
go to their beds and give themselves no trouble about their work, and
yet in the morning the maids will find the kitchen swept up, and water
brought in, and the men will find the horses in the stable well
cleaned and curried, and perhaps a supply of corn cribbed for them
from the neighbours' barns. But he punishes them for any irregularity
that takes place.

The Nisses of Norway, we are told, are fond of the moon-light, and in
the winter time they may be seen jumping over the yard, or driving in
sledges. They are also skilled in music and dancing, and will, it is
said, give instructions on the fiddle for a _grey sheep_, like the
Swedish Strömkarl.[201]

Every church, too, has its Nis, who looks to order, and chastises
those who misbehave themselves. He is called the Kirkegrim.


                        _The Nis Removing._[202]

It is very difficult, they say, to get rid of a Nis when one wishes
it. A man who lived in a house in which a Nis carried his pranks to
great lengths resolved to quit the tenement, and leave him there
alone. Several cart-loads of furniture and other articles were already
gone, and the man was come to take away the last, which consisted
chiefly of empty tubs, barrels, and things of that sort. The load was
now all ready, and the man had just bidden farewell to his house and
to the Nis, hoping for comfort in his new habitation, when happening,
from some cause or other, to go to the back of the cart, there he saw
the Nis sitting in one of the tubs in the cart, plainly with the
intention of going along with him wherever he went. The good man was
surprised and disconcerted beyond measure at seeing that all his
labour was to no purpose; but the Nis began to laugh heartily, popped
his head up out of the tub, and cried to the bewildered farmer, "Ha!
we're moving to-day, you see."[203]

