                                 STAGNELIUS.

      The Neck no more upon the river sings,
      And no Mermaid to bleach her linen flings
        Upon the waves in the mild solar ray.

It is a prevalent opinion in the North that all the various beings of
the popular creed were once worsted in a conflict with superior powers,
and condemned to remain till doomsday in certain assigned abodes. The
Dwarfs, or Hill (_Berg_) trolls, were appointed the hills; the Elves the
groves and leafy trees; the Hill-people (_Högfolk_[205]) the caves and
caverns; the Mermen, Mermaids, and Necks, the sea, lakes, and rivers;
the River-man (_Strömkarl_) the small waterfalls. Both the Catholic and
Protestant clergy have endeavoured to excite an aversion to these
beings, but in vain. They are regarded as possessing considerable power
over man and nature, and it is believed that though now unhappy, they
will be eventually saved, or _faa förlossning_ (get salvation), as it is
expressed.

The NECK (in Danish Nökke[206]) is the river-spirit. The ideas
respecting him are various. Sometimes he is represented as sitting, of
summer nights, on the surface of the water, like a pretty little boy,
with golden hair hanging in ringlets, and a red cap on his head;
sometimes as above the water, like a handsome young man, but beneath
like a horse;[207] at other times, as an old man with a long beard,
out of which he wrings the water as he sits on the cliffs. In this
last form, Odin, according to the Icelandic sagas, has sometimes
revealed himself.

The Neck is very severe against any haughty maiden who makes an ill
return to the love of her wooer; but should he himself fall in love
with a maid of human kind, he is the most polite and attentive suitor
in the world.

Though he is thus severe only against those who deserve it, yet country
people when they are upon the water use certain precautions against his
power. Metals, particularly steel, are believed "_to bind the Neck_,"
(_binda Necken_); and when going on the open sea, they usually put a
knife in the bottom of the boat, or set a nail in a reed. In Norway the
following charm is considered effectual against the Neck:--

      Nyk, nyk, naal i vatn!
      Jomfru Maria kastet staal i vatn!
      Du sök, äk flyt!

      Neck, neck, nail in water!
      The virgin Mary casteth steel in water!
      Do you sink, I flit!

The Neck is a great musician. He sits on the water and plays on his
gold harp, the harmony of which operates on all nature. To learn music
of him, a person must present him with a black lamb, and also promise
him resurrection and redemption.

The following story is told in all parts of Sweden:--

"Two boys were one time playing near a river that ran by their father's
house. The Neck rose and sat on the surface of the water, and played on
his harp; but one of the children said to him, 'What is the use, Neck,
of your sitting there and playing? you will never be saved.' The Neck
then began to weep bitterly, flung away his harp, and sank down to the
bottom. The children went home, and told the whole story to their
father, who was the parish priest. He said they were wrong to say so to
the Neck, and desired them to go immediately back to the river, and
console him with the promise of salvation. They did so: and when they
came down to the river the Neck was sitting on the water, weeping and
lamenting. They then said to him, 'Neck, do not grieve so; our father
says that your Redeemer liveth also.' The Neck then took his harp and
played most sweetly, until long after the sun was gone down."

This legend is also found in Denmark, but in a less agreeable form. A
clergyman, it is said, was journeying one night to Roeskilde in
Zealand. His way led by a hill in which there was music and dancing
and great merriment going forward. Some dwarfs jumped suddenly out of
it, stopped the carriage, and asked him whither he was going. He
replied to the synod of the church. They asked him if he thought they
could be saved. To that, he replied, he could not give an immediate
answer. They then begged that he would give them a reply by next
year. When he next passed, and they made the same demand, he replied,
"No, you are all damned." Scarcely had he spoken the word, when the
whole hill appeared in flames.

In another form of this legend, a priest says to the Neck, "Sooner will
this cane which I hold in my hand grow green flowers than thou shalt
attain salvation." The Neck in grief flung away his harp and wept, and
the priest rode on. But soon his cane began to put forth leaves and
blossoms, and he then went back to communicate the glad tidings to the
Neck who now joyously played on all the entire night.[208]

