                       _The Power of the Harp._

      Little Kerstin she weeps in her bower all the day;
      Sir Peter in his courtyard is playing so gay.
          My heart's own dear!
          Tell me wherefore you grieve?

      "Grieve you for saddle, or grieve you for steed?
      Or grieve you for that I have you wed?"
          My heart's, &c.

      "And grieve do I not for saddle or for steed:
      And grieve do I not for that I have you wed.
          My heart's, &c.

      "Much more do I grieve for my fair gold hair,
      Which in the blue waves shall be stained to-day.
          My heart's, &c.

      "Much more do I grieve for Ringfalla flood,
      In which have been drowned my two sisters proud.
          My heart's, &c.

      "It was laid out for me in my infancy,
      That my wedding-day should prove heavy to me."
          My heart's, &c.

      "And I shall make them the horse round shoe,
      He shall not stumble on his four gold shoes.
          My heart's, &c.

      "Twelve of my courtiers shall before thee ride,
      Twelve of my courtiers upon each side."
          My heart's, &c.

      But when they were come to Ringfalla wood,
      There sported a hart with gilded horns proud.
          My heart's, &c.

      And all the courtiers after the hart are gone;
      Little Kerstin, she must proceed alone.
          My heart's, &c.

      And when on Ringfalla bridge she goes,
      Her steed he stumbled on his four gold shoes.
          My heart's, &c.

      Four gold shoes, and thirty gold nails,
      And the maiden into the swift stream falls.
          My heart's, &c.

      Sir Peter he spake to his footpage so--
      "Thou must for my gold harp instantly go."
          My heart's, &c.

      The first stroke on his gold harp he gave
      The foul ugly Neck sat and laughed on the wave.
          My heart's, &c.

      The second time the gold harp he swept,
      The foul ugly Neck on the wave sat and wept.
          My heart's, &c.

      The third stroke on the gold harp rang,
      Little Kerstin reached up her snow-white arm.
          My heart's, &c.[209]

      He played the bark from off the high trees;
      He played Little Kerstin back on his knees.
          My heart's, &c.

      And the Neck he out of the waves came there,
      And a proud maiden on each arm he bare.
          My heart's own dear!
          Tell me wherefore you grieve?[210]

The STRÖMKARL, called in Norway Grim or Fosse-Grim[211]
(_Waterfall-Grim_) is a musical genius like the Neck. Like him too,
when properly propitiated, he communicates his art. The sacrifice also
is a black lamb,[212] which the offerer must present with averted
head, and on Thursday evening. If it is poor the pupil gets no further
than to the tuning of the instruments; if it is fat the Strömkarl
seizes the votary by the right hand, and swings it backwards and
forwards till the blood runs out at the finger-ends. The aspirant is
then enabled to play in such a masterly manner that the trees dance
and waterfalls stop at his music.[213]

The Havmand, or Merman, is described as of a handsome form, with green
or black hair and beard. He dwells either in the bottom of the sea, or
in the cliffs and hills near the sea shore, and is regarded as rather
a good and beneficent kind of being.[214]

The Havfrue, or Mermaid, is represented in the popular tradition
sometimes as a good, at other times as an evil and treacherous being.
She is beautiful in her appearance. Fishermen sometimes see her in the
bright summer's sun, when a thin mist hangs over the sea, sitting on the
surface of the water, and combing her long golden hair with a golden
comb, or driving up her snow-white cattle to feed on the strands and
small islands. At other times she comes as a beautiful maiden, chilled
and shivering with the cold of the night, to the fires the fishers have
kindled, hoping by this means to entice them to her love.[215] Her
appearance prognosticates both storm and ill success in their fishing.
People that are drowned, and whose bodies are not found, are believed to
be taken into the dwellings of the Mermaids. These beings are also
supposed to have the power of foretelling future events. A Mermaid, we
are told, prophesied the birth of Christian IV. of Denmark, and

      En Havfrue op af Vandet steg,
      Og spaade Herr Sinklar ilde.