                        ISLANDSKE LANDLEVNET.

                        What! cannot one
      Here, too, live happy? I believe it now
      As possible, as in the heathen age,
      For the bold Scandinavians it was,
      On this cold isle.

It is in vain that we look into the works of travellers for information
on the subject of popular belief in Iceland. Their attention was too
much occupied by Geysers, volcanoes, agriculture, and religion, to allow
them to devote any part of it to this, in their eyes, unimportant
subject. So that, were it not for some short but curious notices given
by natives of the island, we should be quite ignorant of the fate of the
subordinate classes of the old religion in Iceland.

Torfæus, who wrote in the latter end of the seventeenth century, gives,
in his preface to his edition of Hrolf Krakas Saga, the opinion of a
venerable Icelandic pastor, named Einar Gudmund, respecting the Dwarfs.
This opinion Torfæus heard when a boy from the lips of the old man.

"I believe, and am fully persuaded," said he, "that this people are the
creatures of God, consisting of a body and a rational spirit; that they
are of both sexes; marry, and have children; and that all human acts
take place among them as with us: that they are possessed of cattle, and
of many other kinds of property; have poverty and riches, weeping and
laughter, sleep and wake, and have all other affections belonging to
human nature; and that they enjoy a longer or a shorter term of life
according to the will and pleasure of God. Their power of having
children," he adds, "appears from this, that some of their women have
had children by men, and were very anxious to have their offspring
dipped in the sacred font, and initiated into Christianity; but they, in
general, sought in vain. Thorkatla Mari, the wife of Kari, was pregnant
by a Hill-man, but she did not bring the child Aresus into the world, as
appears from the poems made on this fatal occasion.

"There was formerly on the lands of Haga a nobleman named Sigvard
Fostre, who had to do with a Hill-woman. He promised her faithfully
that he would take care to have the child received into the bosom of
the church. In due time the woman came with her child and laid it on
the churchyard wall, and along with it a gilded cup and a holy robe
(presents she intended making to the church for the baptism of her
child), and then retired a little way. The pastor inquired who
acknowledged himself the father of the child. Sigvard, perhaps, out of
shame, did not venture to acknowledge himself. The clerk now asked him
if it should be baptised or not. Sigvard said 'No,' lest by assenting
he should be proved to be the father. The infant then was left where
it was, untouched and unbaptised. The mother, filled with rage,
snatched up her babe and the cup, but left the vestment, the remains
of which may still be seen in Haga. That woman foretold and inflicted
a singular disease on Sigvard and his posterity till the ninth
generation, and several of his descendants are to this day afflicted
with it. Andrew Gudmund (from which I am the seventh in descent) had
an affair of the same kind. He also refused to have the child
baptised, and he and his posterity have suffered a remarkable disease,
of which very many of them have died; but some, by the interposition
of good men, have escaped the deserved punishment."

The fullest account we have of the Icelandic Elves or Dwarfs is
contained in the following passage of the Ecclesiastical History of
Iceland of the learned Finnus Johannæus.

"As we have not as yet," says he, "spoken a single word about the very
ancient, and I know not whether more ridiculous or perverse,
persuasion of our forefathers about semigods, this seems the proper
place for saying a few words about this so celebrated figment, as it
was chiefly in this period it attained its acmè, and it was believed
as a true and necessary article of faith, that there are genii or
semigods, called in our language Alfa and Alfa-folk.

"Authors vary respecting their essence and origin. Some hold that they
have been created by God immediately and without the intervention of
parents, like some kinds of spirits: others maintain that they are
sprung from Adam, but before the creation of Eve:[218] lastly, some
refer them to another race of men, or to a stock of præ-Adamites. Some
bestow on them not merely a human body, but an immortal soul: others
assign them merely mortal breath (_spiritum_) instead of a soul,
whence a certain blockhead,[219] in an essay written by him respecting
them, calls them our half-kin (_half-kyn_).

"According to the old wives' tales that are related about this race of
genii who inhabit Iceland and its vicinity, they have a political form
of government modelled after the same pattern as that which the
inhabitants themselves are under. Two viceroys rule over them, who in
turn every second year, attended by some of the subjects, sail to
Norway, to present themselves before the monarch of the whole race,
who resides there, and to give him a true report concerning the
fidelity, good conduct, and obedience of the subjects; and those who
accompany them are to accuse the government or viceroys if they have
transgressed the bounds of justice or of good morals. If these are
convicted of crime or injustice, they are forthwith stript of their
office, and others are appointed in their place.

"This nation is reported to cultivate justice and equity above all
other virtues, and hence, though they are very potent, especially with
words and imprecations, they very rarely, unless provoked or injured,
do any mischief to man; but when irritated they avenge themselves on
their enemies with dreadful curses and punishments.

"The new-born infants of Christians are, before baptism, believed to
be exposed to great peril of being stolen by them, and their own,
which they foresee likely to be feeble in mind, in body, in beauty, or
other gifts, being substituted for them. These supposititious children
of the semigods are called Umskiptingar; whence nurses and midwives
were strictly enjoined to watch constantly, and to hold the infant
firmly in their arms, till it had had the benefit of baptism, lest
they should furnish any opportunity for such a change. Hence it comes,
that the vulgar use to call fools, deformed people, and those who act
rudely and uncivilly, _Umskiptinga eins og hann sie ko minnaf Alfum_,
_i.e._ changelings, and come of the Alfs.

"They use rocks, hills, and even the seas, for their habitations,
which withinside are neat, and all their domestic utensils extremely
clean and orderly. They sometimes invite men home, and take especial
delight in the converse of Christians, some of whom have had
intercourse with their daughters or sisters, who are no less wanton
than beautiful, and have had children by them, who must by all means
be washed in holy water, that they may receive an immortal soul, and
one that can be saved. Nay, they have not been ashamed to feign that
certain women of them have been joined in lawful marriage with men,
and continued for a long time with them, happily at first, but, for
the most part, with an ill or tragical conclusion.

"Their cattle, if not very numerous, are at least very profitable.
They are invisible as their owners are, unless when it pleases them
to appear, which usually takes place when the weather is serene and
the sun shining very bright; for as they do not see the sun within
their dwellings, they frequently walk out in the sunshine that they
may be cheered by his radiance.[220] Hence, even the coffins of dead
kings and nobles, such as are the oblong stones which are to be seen
here and there, in wildernesses and rough places, always lie in the
open air and exposed to the sun.

"They change their abodes and habitations occasionally like mankind;
this they do on new-year's night; whence certain dreamers and
mountebanks used on that night to watch in the roads, that, by the means
of various forms of conjurations appointed for that purpose, they might
extort from them as they passed along the knowledge of future
events.[221] But people in general, who were not acquainted with such
things, especially the heads of families, used on this evening strictly
to charge their children and servants to be sure to be serious and
modest in their actions and language, lest their invisible guests, and
mayhap future neighbours, should be aggrieved or any way offended.
Hence, when going to bed they did not shut the outer doors of their
houses, nor even the door of the sitting-room, but having kindled a
light, and laid out a table, they desired the invisible personages who
had arrived, or were to arrive, to partake, if it was their pleasure, of
the food that was laid out for them; and hoped that if it pleased them
to dwell within the limits of their lands, they would live safe and
sound, and be propitious to them. As this superstitious belief is
extremely ancient, so it long continued in full vigour, and was held by
some even within the memory of our fathers."[222]

The Icelandic Neck, Kelpie, or Water-Spirit, is called Nickur,
Ninnir, and Hnikur, one of the Eddaic names of Odin. He appears always
in the form of a fine _apple-grey_ horse on the sea-shore; but he may
be distinguished from ordinary horses by the circumstance of his hoofs
being reversed. If any one is so foolish as to mount him, he gallops
off, and plunges into the sea with his burden. He can, however, be
caught in a particular manner, tamed, and made to work.[223]
