                            ISLE OF RÜGEN.

      Des Tagscheins Blendung drückt,
      Nur Finsterniss beglückt;
      Drum hausen wir so gern
      Tief in des Erdballs Kern.
                             MATTHISSON.

      Day's dazzling light annoys
      Us, darkness only joys;
      We therefore love to dwell
      Deep underneath earth's shell.


We now return to the Baltic, to the Isle of Rügen, once a chief seat
of the Vendish religion; but its priests were massacred by the
Scandinavians, and all traces of their system effaced. Its fairy
mythology now agrees with that of its Gothic neighbours, and Mr.
Arndt,[237] a native of the island, has enabled us to give the
following tolerably full account of it:--

The inhabitants of Rügen believe in three kinds of Dwarfs, or
underground people, the White, the Brown, and the Black; so named from
the colour of their several habiliments.[238]

The White are the most delicate and beautiful of all, and are of an
innocent and gentle disposition. During the winter, when the face of
nature is cold, raw, and cheerless, they remain still and quiet in
their hills, solely engaged in the fashioning of the finest works in
silver and gold, of too delicate a texture for mortal eyes to discern.
Thus they pass the winter; but no sooner does the spring return than
they abandon their recesses, and live through all the summer above
ground, in sunshine and starlight, in uninterrupted revelry and
enjoyment. The moment the trees and flowers begin to sprout and bud in
the early days of spring, they emerge from their hills, and get among
the stalks and branches, and thence to the blossoms and flowers, where
they sit and gaze around them. In the night, when mortals sleep, the
White Dwarfs come forth, and dance their joyous roundels in the green
grass, about the hills, and brooks, and springs, making the sweetest
and most delicate music, bewildering travellers, who hear and wonder
at the strains of the invisible musicians. They may, if they will, go
out by day, but never in company; these daylight rambles being allowed
them only when alone and under some assumed form. They therefore
frequently fly about in the shape of party-coloured little birds, or
butterflies, or snow-white doves, showing kindness and benevolence to
the good who merit their favour.

The Brown Dwarfs, the next in order, are less than eighteen inches high.
They wear little brown coats and jackets, and a brown cap on their head,
with a little silver bell in it. Some of them wear black shoes with red
strings in them; in general, however, they wear fine glass ones; at
their dances none of them wear any other. They are very handsome in
their persons, with clear light-coloured eyes, and small and most
beautiful hands and feet. They are on the whole of a cheerful,
good-natured disposition, mingled with some roguish traits. Like the
White Dwarfs, they are great artists in gold and silver, working so
curiously as to astonish those who happen to see their performances. At
night they come out of their hills and dance by the light of the moon
and stars. They also glide invisibly into people's houses, their caps
rendering them imperceptible by all who have not similar caps. They are
said to play all kinds of tricks, to change the children in the cradles,
and take them away. This charge is perhaps unfounded, but certainly,
children who fall into their hands must serve them for fifty years. They
possess an unlimited power of transformation, and can pass through the
smallest keyholes. Frequently they bring with them presents for
children, or lay gold rings and ducats, and the like, in their way, and
often are invisibly present, and save them from the perils of fire and
water. They plague and annoy lazy men-servants and untidy maids with
frightful dreams; oppress them as the nightmare; bite them as fleas; and
scratch and tear them like cats and dogs; and often in the night
frighten, in the shape of owls, thieves and lovers, or, like
Will-'o-the-wisps, lead them astray into bogs and marshes, and perhaps
up to those who are in pursuit of them.

The Black Dwarfs wear black jackets and caps, are not handsome like the
others, but on the contrary are horridly ugly, with weeping eyes, like
blacksmiths and colliers. They are most expert workmen, especially in
steel, to which they can give a degree at once of hardness and
flexibility which no human smith can imitate; for the swords they make
will bend like rushes, and are as hard as diamonds. In old times arms
and armour made by them were in great request: shirts of mail
manufactured by them were as fine as cobwebs, and yet no bullet would
penetrate them, and no helm or corslet could resist the swords they
fashioned; but all these things are now gone out of use.

These Dwarfs are of a malicious, ill disposition, and delight in doing
mischief to mankind; they are unsocial, and there are seldom more than
two or three of them seen together; they keep mostly in their hills,
and seldom come out in the daytime, nor do they ever go far from home.
People say that in the summer they are fond of sitting under the elder
trees, the smell of which is very grateful to them, and that any one
that wants anything of them must go there and call them. Some say they
have no music and dancing, only howling and whimpering; and that when
a screaming is heard in the woods and marshes, like that of crying
children, and a mewing and screeching like that of a multitude of cats
or owls, the sounds proceed from their midnight assemblies, and are
made by the vociferous Dwarfs.
