The principal residence of the two first classes of the
underground-people in Rügen is what are called the Nine-hills, near
Rambin. These hills lie on the west point of the island, about a
quarter of a mile from the village of Rambin in the open country. They
are small mounds, or Giants' graves (_Hünengräber_), as such are
called, and are the subject of many a tale and legend among the
people. The account of their origin is as follows:--

"A long, long time ago there lived in Rügen a mighty Giant named
Balderich. He was vexed that the country was an island, and that he had
always to wade through the sea when he wanted to go to Pomerania and the
main land. He accordingly got an immense apron made, and he tied it
round his waist and filled it with earth, for he wanted to make a dam of
earth for himself from the island to the main-land. As he was going with
his load over Rodenkirchen, a hole tore in the apron, and the clay that
fell out formed the Nine-hills. He stopped the hole and went on; but
when he he had gotten to Gustau, another hole tore in the apron, and
thirteen little hills fell out. He proceeded to the sea with what he had
now remaining, and pouring the earth into the waters, formed the hook of
Prosnitz, and the pretty little peninsula of Drigge. But there still
remained a small space between Rügen and Pomerania, which so incensed
the Giant that he fell down in a fit and died, from which unfortunate
accident his dam was never finished."[239]

A Giant-maiden commenced a similar operation on the Pomeranian side
"in order," said she, "that I may be able to go over the bit of water
without wetting my little slippers." So she filled her apron with sand
and hurried down to the sea-side. But there was a hole in the apron
and just behind Sagard a part of the sand ran out and formed a little
hill named Dubbleworth. "Ah!" said she, "now my mother will scold me."
She stopped the hole with her hand and ran on as fast as she could.
But her mother looked over the wood and cried, "You nasty child, what
are you about? Come here and you shall get a good whipping." The
daughter in a fright let go the apron, and all the sand ran out and
formed the barren hills near Litzow.[240]

The Dwarfs took up their abode in the Nine-hills. The White ones own
two of them, and the Brown ones seven, for there are no Black ones
there. These dwell chiefly on the coast-hills, along the shore between
the Ahlbeck and Mönchgut, where they hold their assemblies, and
plunder the ships that are wrecked on the coast.

       *       *       *       *       *