                                                              _Golding._

Thus we have endeavoured to trace out the origin, and mark the progress
of the word Fairy, through its varying significations, and trust that
the subject will now appear placed in a clear and intelligible light.

After the appearance of the Faerie Queene, all distinctions were
confounded, the name and attributes of the real Fays or Fairies of
romance were completely transferred to the little beings who,
according to the popular belief, made 'the green sour ringlets whereof
the ewe not bites.' The change thus operated by the poets established
itself firmly among the people; a strong proof, if this idea be
correct, of the power of the poetry of a nation in altering the
phraseology of even the lowest classes[20] of its society.

Shakspeare must be regarded as a principal agent in this revolution;
yet even he uses Fairy once in the proper sense of Fay; a sense it
seems to have nearly lost, till it was again brought into use by the
translators of the French Contes des Fées in the last century.

      To this great Fairy I'll commend thy acts.
                       _Antony and Cleopatra_, act iv. sc. 8.

And Milton speaks

      Of Faery damsels met in forests wide
      By knights of Logres or of Lyones,
      Lancelot, or Pelleas, or Pellinore.

Yet he elsewhere mentions the

                           Faery elves,
      Whose midnight revels by a forest side
      Or fountain some belated peasant sees.

Finally, Randolph, in his Amyntas, employs it, for perhaps the last
time, in its second sense, Fairy-land:

                                I do think
      There will be of Jocastus' brood in Fairy.
                                           Act i. sc. 3.

We must not here omit to mention that the Germans, along with the
French romances, early adopted the name of the Fées. They called them
Feen and Feinen.[21] In the Tristram of Gottfried von Strazburg we are
told that Duke Gylan had a syren-like little dog,

  Dez wart dem Herzoge gesandt        'Twas sent unto the duke, pardé,
  Uz Avalun, der _Feinen_ land,       From Avalun, the Fays' countrie,
      Von einer Gottinne.--V. 1673.       By a gentle goddess.

In the old German romance of Isotte and Blanscheflur, the hunter who
sees Isotte asleep says, I doubt

  Dez sie menschlich sei,                   If she human be,
  Sie ist schöner denn eine _Feine_,        She is fairer than a Fay.
  Von Fleische noch von Beine               Of flesh or bone, I say,
  Kunte nit gewerden                        Never could have birth
  So schönes auf der erden.                 A thing so fair on earth.

Our subject naturally divides itself into two principal branches,
corresponding to the different classes of beings to which the name
Fairy has been applied. The first, beings of the human race, but
endowed with powers beyond those usually allotted to men, whom we
shall term FAYS, or FAIRIES OF ROMANCE. The second, those little
beings of the popular creeds, whose descent we propose to trace from
the cunning and ingenious Duergar or dwarfs of northern mythology, and
whom we shall denominate ELVES or POPULAR FAIRIES.

It cannot be expected that our classifications should vie in accuracy
and determinateness with those of natural science. The human
imagination, of which these beings are the offspring, works not, at
least that we can discover, like nature, by fixed and invariable laws;
and it would be hard indeed to exact from the Fairy historian the
rigid distinction of classes and orders which we expect from the
botanist or chemist. The various species so run into and are
confounded with one another; the actions and attributes of one kind
are so frequently ascribed to another, that scarcely have we begun to
erect our system, when we find the foundation crumbling under our
feet. Indeed it could not well be otherwise, when we recollect that
all these beings once formed parts of ancient and exploded systems of
religion, and that it is chiefly in the traditions of the peasantry
that their memorial has been preserved.

We will now proceed to consider the Fairies of romance; and as they
are indebted, though not for their name, yet perhaps for some of their
attributes, to the Peries of Persia, we will commence with that
country. We will thence pursue our course through Arabia, till we
arrive at the middle-age romance of Europe, and the gorgeous realms of
Fairy-land; and thence, casting a glance at the Faerie Queene, advance
to the mountains and forests of the North, there to trace the origin
of the light-hearted, night-tripping elves.
