                               GERMANY.

      Von wilden getwergen han ich gehöret sagen
      Si sin in holren bergen; unt daz si ze scherme tragen
      Einez heizet tarnkappen, von wunderlicher art--
      Swerz hat an sime libe, der sol vil wohl sin bewart
      Vor slegen unt vor stichen. NIBELUNGEN, LIED st. 342.

      Of wild dwarfs I oft have heard men declare
      They dwell in hollow mountains; and for defence they wear
      A thing called a Tarn-cloke, of wonderful nature--
      Who has it on his body will ever be secure
      'Gainst cutting and 'gainst thrusting.


The religion of the ancient Germans, probably the same with that of
the Scandinavians, contained, like it, Alfs, Dwarfs, and Giants. The
Alfs have fallen from the popular creed,[245] but the Dwarfs still
retain their former dominion. Unlike those of the North, they have put
off their heathen character, and, with their human neighbours, have
embraced a purer faith. With the creed they seem to have adopted the
spirit of their new religion also. In most of the traditions
respecting them we recognise benevolence as one of the principal
traits of their character.

The oldest monuments of German popular belief are the poems of the
Heldenbuch (_Hero-book_) and the spirit-stirring Nibelungen Lied.[246]
In these poems the Dwarfs are actors of importance.

In this last-named celebrated poem the Dwarf Albrich appears as the
guardian of the celebrated Hoard which Sifrit (Siegfried) won from the
Nibelungen. The Dwarf is twice vanquished by the hero who gains his
Tarn-kappe, or Mantle of Invisibility.[247]

In the Heldenbuch we meet with the Dwarf-king Laurin, whose garden
Dietrich of Bern and his warriors broke into and laid waste. To repel
the invader the Dwarf appears in magnificent array: twenty-three
stanzas are occupied with the description of his banner, helmet,
shield, and other accoutrements. A furious combat ensues, in which the
Dwarf has long the advantage, as his magic ring and girdle endow him
with the strength of twenty-four men, and his Hel Keplein[248]
(Tarnkappe) renders him invisible at pleasure. At length, by the
advice of Hildebrand, Dietrich strikes off the Dwarf's finger, breaks
his girdle, and pulls off his Hel Keplein, and thus succeeds in
vanquishing his enemy. Laurin is afterwards reconciled to the heroes,
and prevails on them to enter the mountain in which he dwelt, and
partake of a banquet. Having them now in his power, he treacherously
makes them all his prisoners. His queen, however, Ditlaub's sister,
whom he had stolen away from under a linden, releases them: their
liberation is followed by a terrific engagement between them and
Laurin, backed by a numerous host of Dwarfs. Laurin is again overcome;
he loses his queen; his hill is plundered of its treasures, and
himself led to Bern, and there reduced to the extremity of earning his
bread by becoming a buffoon.

In the poem named Hürnen Sifrit[249] the Dwarf Eugel[250] renders the
hero good service in his combat with the enchanted Dragon who had
carried off the fair Chrimhild from Worms, and enclosed her in the
Drachenstein. When Sifrit is treacherously attacked by the Giant
Kuperan, the ally of the Dragon, the Dwarf flings his Nebelkappe over
him to protect him.
