              _Journey of the Dwarfs over the Mountain._

On the north side of the Hartz there dwelt several thousand Dwarfs in
the clefts of the rocks, and in the Dwarf-caves that still remain. It
was, however, but rarely that they appeared to the inhabitants in a
visible form; they generally went about among them protected by their
mist-caps, unseen and unnoticed.

Many of these Dwarfs were good-natured, and, on particular occasions,
very obliging to the inhabitants, who used, for instance, in case of a
wedding or a christening, to borrow various articles for the table out
of the caves of the Dwarfs, It was, however, highly imprudent to
provoke their resentment; as when injured or offended, they were
malicious and wicked, and did every possible injury to the offender.

A baker, who lived in the valley between Blenkenburg and Quedlinburg,
used to remark that a part of the loaves he baked was always missing,
though he never could find out the thief. This continual secret theft
was gradually reducing him to poverty. At last he began to suspect the
Dwarfs of being the cause of his misfortune. He accordingly got a bunch
of little twigs, and beating the air with them in all directions, at
length struck the mist-caps off some Dwarfs, who could now conceal
themselves no longer. There was a great noise made about it; several
other Dwarfs were caught in the act of committing theft, and at last the
whole of the Dwarf-people were forced to quit the country. In order, in
some degree, to indemnify the inhabitants for what had been stolen, and
at the same time to be able to estimate the number of those that
departed, a large cask was set up on what is now called Kirchberg, near
the village of Thele, into which each Dwarf was to cast a piece of
money. This cask was found, after the departure of the Dwarfs, to be
quite filled with ancient coins, so great was their number.

The Dwarf-people went by Warnstadt, a village not far from
Quedlinburg, still going toward the east. Since that time the Dwarfs
have disappeared out of this country; and it is only now and then that
a solitary one may be seen.

       *       *       *       *       *