THE TOLAETH.

The Tolaeth is also a sound heard before death or a funeral.

It is represented as superstitious rappings, or knockings, strange
noises, or sounds of footsteps or of carriages, etc.

This superstition is common in all parts of the country at the present
day; and I have met and heard of many carpenters who always know
when they are to have an order for a coffin, as they hear strange
knockings in their workshops resembling the noise or knockings made
by a carpenter when engaged in coffin-making. An old lady who lives
at Pontshan, Llandyssul, told me three years ago, that when she was
a young woman, she and two other young women were on one occasion
sitting near the fire all night watching and nursing a sick old
woman of 80 years of age. About four o'clock in the morning, to their
great surprise, they heard the door open, and the sound of someone or
something entering the house and going about the room, but nothing
was visible, nor did the door open as a matter of fact. The aged
patient also heard the sound and enquired who had come in. At four
o'clock next morning the old woman died. The same woman also told me
that before the death of a prominent Esquire in Carmarthenshire, she
remembered hearing the sound of a carriage before the front entrance
of the mansion, when no carriage was near.

Sound of carriages before the death of one of the gentry is a thing
that we often hear of even at the present day everywhere in West
and Mid-Wales.

Sir Edward W. P. Pryse, Gogerddan, informed me that he was told
that people had heard the sound of carriages before the death of
his grandfather, who died in 1855, and was a member of Parliament
for Cardigan. Nanteos, another ancient family in the same county,
has, or had, not only a phantom coach, but even a tutelary guardian;
but whether this Welsh "Banshi" was a woman under enchantment, or a
fairy, is not known.

It was formerly believed that the church bell was tolled by a spirit or
some other supernatural agency, before a death in certain families. I
wonder if the word "Tolaeth" is derived from toll?


