CHAPTER VIII.

MISCELLANEOUS BELIEFS, WEATHER SIGNS, BIRDS, LORE, Etc.


To find a horse shoe on the road or in a field is considered extremely
lucky.

To see a lamb for the first time during the season with its head
facing you is also lucky.

When you see a newly-wedded couple throw an old pair of shoes at them,
for it means "good luck to them."

This was done now at Llanilar, October, 1910, at the wedding of Miss
Jones, Bryntirion, by Mrs. Richards, Derwen-Deg.

To drop your stick or umbrella on your journey is unlucky.

When you have started on a journey, to turn back to the house for
something you have forgotten, means bad luck.

To bring heather into the house is a sign of death: white heather,
however, is considered extremely lucky.

It is unlucky to meet a white horse when on a journey, to change it
into luck spit over your little finger.

If a young lady looks through a silk-handkerchief at the first new
moon after New Year's Day, she will be able to see her future husband.

It is unlucky to find a coin on the road, but if the head and not
the tail happens to be up it is a lucky omen.

To carry in one's purse a crooked sixpence, or a coin with a hole in
it is lucky.

Spit on the first coin you get in the day, and you'll have luck for
24 hours.

Never begin any new work on a Friday or Saturday.

It is considered unlucky for a servant to go to service on a Thursday
or a Saturday. In Cardiganshire servants go to service either on a
Monday or Wednesday, which are considered lucky days.

A woman near Narberth in Pembrokeshire told me that Tuesdays and
Thursdays are lucky days in that part.

In some parts of Carmarthenshire, the most lucky days are Tuesdays,
Thursdays and Saturdays.

But the fact of it is, I have discovered that the days which are
considered lucky in one part of the country are considered unlucky
in another part.

Odd numbers, especially three, and seven, are said to be lucky numbers.

Thirteen, however, is considered very unlucky, and it is thought that
if thirteen persons sit down to table, the last person who sits down
and the first to rise up, are those to whom the ill-luck will fall.

It is considered unlucky by many to shake hands across a table;
and when two people are shaking hands, if two others of the company
attempt to shake hands across their hands it is a very unlucky sign.

It is considered unlucky by some to baptise more than one child in
the same water. There is also the same superstition respecting one
man washing after another in the same water.

In Cardiganshire, it is believed that he who dies on Sunday is a
godly man.

Mr. Eyre Evans, Aberystwyth, informed me that he has just come across
some people in Montgomeryshire who consider it unlucky to pick up or
carry white stones in their pockets; and it seems from Sir John Rhys,
that Manx Fishermen do not like to have a white stone in a boat.

Curious Belief about Salt.--When people remove into a new house it
is customary to take a bar of salt into the building before taking
in any of the furniture. This is supposed to secure good luck.

When this salt ceremony is forgotten or neglected, some people,
especially women, are very much perturbed.

I have discovered that this curious old belief about salt is very
common at present in the towns of Aberystwyth, Carmarthen, and Tenby,
and other parts of West Wales.

To spill salt denotes quarrels. To serve another person with salt,
is to serve him with sorrow.

When a white spot appeals on the nail of one of our fingers it means
a present.

Never stir the fire in anybody's house unless you are a friend of
seven years' standing.

To break a looking-glass signifies ill-luck for seven years.

To put the bellows on a table is considered unlucky. There is also
the same superstition about boots all over Wales.

Never mend your clothes while you are wearing them.

If you see a pin pick it up to insure good luck.

There is a saying in Welsh "Gwell plygu at bin, na phlygu at ddim," (It
is better to bend down for a pin, than to bend down for nothing.) It
seems that a needle, however, is not considered so lucky; for I once
overheard a woman who had quarrelled with her neighbour telling her
husband that her neighbour and herself were friends before she had
given her a needle.

If a bramble clings to the skirts of a young lady some one has fallen
in love with her; and the same is said of a young man when his hat
goes against the branches of a tree.

Welshpeople believe that those who have cold hands are very
warm-hearted; hence the saying "Llaw oer a chalon gynes," (A cold
hand and a warm heart).

Two spoons in a saucer denote a wedding, or according to some that
you are to be married twice dining your lifetime.

In West Wales it is considered unlucky to eat herring or any kind of
fish, from the head downwards; and in order to ensure good luck the
proper way is to eat the fish from the tail towards the head. This
superstition is also known in Cornwall.

If in making tea you forget to replace the lid on the teapot, it is
the sure sign of the arrival of a stranger.

David Evans, a millwright, of Llandilo, informed me a short time ago,
that one evening when he was staying in Lampeter, the woman of the
house who was preparing tea for supper at a late hour, forgot to
replace the lid on the pot. When she found it out, she exclaimed:
"A stranger is sure to come here to-night." The husband and wife,
and the millwright sat down by the fire till a late hour, but there
was no sign of a stranger; just as they were going to bed, however,
there was a knock at the door, and a stranger came in!

Superstitions about Knives.--To cross your knife and fork is considered
unlucky; and crossed knives foretell some approaching disaster.

To find a knife on the road or in a field is also supposed to be
a very bad omen. This superstition is very general in all parts of
Wales, and even in far off parts of the world as well. Many years ago
in Patagonia, South America, two friends of mine and myself met in a
field one morning by appointment, in connection with some particular
business. Each of us three had come from different directions, and
each of us had arrived at the spot the same time, and when we came
together, strange to say, we discovered that each of us had found
a knife on the way! The names of my two friends were Edwin Roberts,
and William James, one was a native of Flintshire, and the other a
native of Cardiganshire, both of them were no means superstitious;
but I well remember that they were very much perturbed on account
of the knives, and feared that some serious misfortune was going to
happen. As soon as we went home we heard the sad news that a young
man named Isaac Howells, was accidentally drowned in the river!

It is also very generally believed at present, that it is unlucky to
receive a knife as a present. In such cases it is customary to pay
a penny for the knife.

Wish whenever you get the first taste of the season of any kind of
food. It is also considered very lucky to taste as many Christmas
puddings as you can.

It is considered unlucky to pass under a ladder.

When walking a long journey if your feet are sore rub the feet of
your stockings with soap.

A ringing in the right ear is a sign of good news; but a ringing in
the left one, unpleasant news.

When the palm of your left hand itches, you are about to give away
some money, or some one is blaming you; but when the palm of you
right hand itches, it is a sign that you are about to receive money,
or that someone is praising you or writing a kind letter to you.

When going on a journey, if the sole of your right foot itches,
the journey will be a pleasant one; but the contrary if the left
foot itches.

A child born with a caul is supposed to be very lucky, and he will
always be safe from drowning. A caul is much appreciated among sailors
in West Wales, as it is believed that to keep one on board the ship
secures a safe voyage.

In all parts of Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire, it is generally
believed among women that it is unlucky to cut the nails of an infant
under six months old. The mother bites them off as they grow.

Superstition about Whistling.--It is considered unlucky for a young
woman to whistle. Whistling is also, or at least was regarded,
as "Talking with the Devil." Mr. Ferrar Fenton in "Pembrokeshire
Antiquities," page 59, says, that many years ago he happened to
whistle one day whilst walking on the pier at Fishguard with a
young sea captain. The Captain seemed very much perturbed at the
whistling, and at last said to Mr. Fenton:--"I wish you would not
whistle here!" "Why? What harm does it do?" "Well, you know," he
said slowly, as if shy at his words, "We Welshmen and sailors are
superstitious over some things, and whistling as you now do, is one
of them." "Superstitious! Not you! But tell me about it: I love all
those old tales." "You see," he replied, "my mother and all the old
people told me when a boy that such kind of whistling was the way
Croignorian (Magicians) talk with the Devil, and sailors believe
something like it, and it always makes my heart start to hear it,
especially on the seashore." Then he added, "Look! how muggy it
is behind Pencaer. You'll bring a gale, and I always feel pity for
the sailors afloat when a sou'-wester rages in the channel behind
it." When the great Divine and Martyr, Bishop Ferrar, of St. David's,
was burnt alive at Carmarthen in 1555, amongst other pretences for
his destruction he was accused of being a Magician, and "teaching
his infant son to talk with the Devil by means of whistling."

In the old days of sailing ships, wind was an agent of great value;
and sometimes sailors whistled for a wind, and this whistling was
considered a direct invocation to "the prince of the power of the air"
to exert himself on their behalf. I have heard of an old man who is
still alive who believes that the devil has some control over wind
and rain.


