WEATHER SIGNS, SEASONS.

The cat sitting with her back to the fire is considered to be a sign
of snow.

The cock crowing on rainy weather is a sign of fair weather for the
rest of the day.

Sea-gulls flying seaward betoken fair weather; when they fly landward,
a storm is coming.

When the crane flies against the stream, that is, up the river
towards its source, it is considered a sign of rain; but the same
bird going down the river, is a sign of fair weather. The same is
said of the heron.

To see ducks and geese flap their wings and dive wildly about is a
sign of rain.

Crows flying low portend rain; but if they fly high in the air it is
a sign of fair weather. The same is said of swallows.

Other rain signs are the woodpecker's screech; and the cows running
wildly about.

If the mountain ponies leave the low and sheltered valleys and return
to the mountains during hard weather, it is a sign of a change in
the weather.

The sheep flocking together is a sign of rough weather.

According to the old Welsh saying the rainbow appearing in the sky
in the morning portends rain; and in the afternoon fair weather:--


   "Bwa'r arch y bore,
    Aml a hir gawode;
    Bwa'r arch prydnawn,
    Tywydd teg a gawn."

    Rainbow in the morning,
    Frequent and long showers;
    Rainbow in the afternoon,
    Fair weather we shall have.


Ceredigion, in "Bye-Gones," August 2nd, 1905, says: "All along the
Merioneth and Cardiganshire Coasts farmers watch the sea carefully
in harvest time. If there be not a cloud in the sky; if the wind be
in a dry quarter; and if the sea be of cerulean blue, if the margin
be discoloured and muddy, the farmers know that rain is approaching
and will probably be on them before nightfall."

If distant mountains are clearly seen, rain may be expected; but if the
mountains appear as if they were far off, it is a sign of fine weather.

When the smoke from the chimney falls down toward the ground, instead
of rising upward, it is a sign that rainy weather will soon follow;
but if the smoke goes upward straight, it is a sign of fair weather.

In the evening, when the horizon in the west is tinged with a ruddy
glow it is a sign that fair and dry weather will come.

In the summer, when the atmosphere is dense and heavy it is a sign
of a thunder-storm.

Rough weather may be expected when the wind blows the dust about,
and throws down people's hats.

When the stone floors are damp and are long in drying after having
been washed is a sign of fair weather.

It is also considered a good sign to see large numbers of white
butterflies.

Another good sign of fine weather is the sun setting red and clear.

Bread and butter falling on the floor upside down signifies "rain is
near," according to some folks.

When the moon's horns are turned up, it is a sign of fine weather;
if they are turned down rain is coming. When the face of the moon is
partially obscured by a light thin vapour rain is coming.

Welsh people in country places generally expect a change of weather
when the moon changes; and I have just been informed at Llanilar,
that a new moon on a wet Saturday, brings wet weather, but that,
on the other hand, a new moon on a fine Saturday, brings fine weather.

By Christmas, the days are said to have lengthened "a cock's stride."

The following Welsh weather sayings I often heard when a boy:--


   "Chwefrol chwyth,
    Chwytha'r deryn oddiar ei nyth."

    (February's blast
    Blows the bird from its nest.)


   "Mawrth a ladd,
    Ebrill a fling."

    (March kills,
    April flays.)


If the hazel (collen) blooms well it is a sign of a fruitful year.



"A NUTTY YEAR."

In Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire, it is believed that if nuts
will be numerous, many children will be born that year.


