THE OWL.

The Owl is rather unpopular in Wales, and its hooting is considered
a sign of ill-luck, if not of death. This bird is also supposed to be
"hateful unto all birds." To account for the unpopularity of the owl
there are many legends. The following is given by Mr. H. W. Evans,
Solva, in the "Pembrokeshire Antiquities," p. 49:

"At one time all the birds unanimously decided to elect unto themselves
a king; and (probably with an eye on the eagle) they resolved to crown
monarch the bird that would soar the highest. On a signal being given
they all started on their upward flight. After a very exciting contest
the eagle was seen considerably higher than all other birds. Having
reached the highest altitude possible he, in a loud voice, proclaimed
himself king. 'No, no, not yet,' said a wren which had perched on the
eagle's back and had now flown a few yards higher. 'Come up here,'
said the wren; but the eagle, having exhausted his strength, was
unable to raise himself, and so the wren became king. When the birds
beheld their king, they became very sad and sorrowful, and they cried
bitterly. Afterwards they met in solemn conclave, and decided to drown
their king in tears. So they procured a pan to hold their tears, and
the birds gathered and craned their necks over the pan and wept. But
the owl clumsily mounted the edge of the pan, thereby upsetting it,
and spilled the tears. The birds became enraged at this, and swore
vengeance against the owl, and ever since he has not dared to show
himself during the day, and is obliged to seek his food at night,
when all other birds are asleep."

According to another version of this tale which is extant in
Carmarthenshire, the wren in the contest for the kingship fell to the
ground and hurt himself. The birds in compassion, prepared healing
broth to cure the little bird--each bird putting something in the pot
towards making this broth--the owl through his clumsiness was guilty
of upsetting this pot containing the healing broth.

According to the Mabinogion, (see Math the son of Mathonwy) a woman
named Blodeuwedd, for her wickedness towards her husband was turned
into an owl; "and because of the shame thou hast done unto Llew Llaw
Gyffes, thou shalt never show thy face in the light of day henceforth;
and that through fear of all the other birds.... Now Blodeuwedd is
an owl in the language of this present time, and for this reason is
the owl hateful unto all birds."


