CHAPTER IX.

WITCHES, WIZARDS, PROPHECIES, DIVINATION, DREAMS.


WITCHES.

The popular belief in witchcraft, is often alluded to by
Shakespeare. In times gone by witches held dreaded sway over the
affairs of men, perhaps more or less in almost every country; for they
were suspected to have entered into a league with Satan, in order to
obtain power to do evil, and it was thought that they possessed some
uncanny knowledge which was used by them to injure people, especially
those whom they hated. It was also believed that they could cause
thunder and lightning, could travel on broomsticks through the air,
and even transform themselves and others into animals, especially
into hares. A good many other imaginary things were also placed to
the credit of witches.

In the beginning of last century, and even up to the middle of
it, witchcraft was very strongly believed in in many parts of
Pembrokeshire, Cardiganshire, Carmarthenshire, Radnorshire, and
Montgomeryshire. Even at the present time, there are some who believe
that there is in it something more than a mere deception. I have met
several who still believe in it. Many well-known characters were proud
of being looked upon as witches and conjurors; because they were feared
as such and could influence people to be charitable to them. Many
an old woman supposed to be a witch, took advantage of the credulity
of the people, went about the farm houses to request charity in the
way of oat-meal, butter, milk, etc., and could get almost anything,
especially from the women, from fear of being witched; for it was
believed that these witches could bring misfortune on families,
cause sickness, and bring a curse on both men and animals; so that
many used to imagine that they were bewitched whenever anything went
wrong, even a slight mischance. Unfaithful young men would soon fulfil
their promise when they found out that the girl they had slighted
was consulting a witch, so that there was some good even in such a
foolish superstition as witchcraft.

