A GIRL WHO WAS BEWITCHED BY THE GYPSIES, NEAR CARMARTHEN.

About fifty years ago there was a young woman very ill in the parish
of Llanllawddog, Carmarthenshire, but no one could tell what was the
matter with her, and the doctor had failed to cure her. At last, her
mother went to consult the local wizard, who at that time kept a school
in the neighbouring parish of Llanpumpsaint, and lived at a place
called Fos-y-Broga. At the woman's request the conjurer accompanied
her home to see her daughter. After seeing the girl he entered into a
private room alone for a few minutes, and wrote something on a sheet
of paper which he folded up and tied it with a thread. This he gave
to the woman and directed her to put the thread round her daughter's
neck, with the folded paper suspending on her breast. He also told
the mother to remember to be at the girl's bedside at twelve o'clock
that night. The young woman was put in bed, and the wizard's folded
paper on her breast. The mother sat down by the fireside till midnight;
and when the clock struck twelve she heard her daughter groaning. She
ran at once to the poor girl's bedside, and found her almost dying
with pain; but very soon she suddenly recovered and felt as well in
health as ever. The conjurer had told the girl's mother that she had
been bewitched by the Gypsies, which caused her illness, and warned
the young woman to keep away from such vagrants in the future. The
Conjurer's paper, which had charmed away her illness was put away
safely in a cupboard amongst other papers and books; and many years
after this when a cousin of the mother was searching for some will
or some other important document, he accidentally opened the wizard's
paper and to his surprise found on it written:


        "Abracadabra,
    Sickness depart from me."


My informant, whose name is Jones, an old farmer in the parish of
Llanpumpsaint, vouches for the truth of the above story, and that
the young woman was a relation of his.

Another old man, named Benjamin Phillips, who lives in the same
neighbourhood gave me a similar tale of another girl bewitched
by the Gypsies, and recovered by obtaining some wild herbs from
a conjurer. Such stories are common all over the country. Certain
plants, especially Meipen Fair, were supposed to possess the power
of destroying charms.


