A FARMER'S DAUGHTER AT WALTON EAST, IN PEMBROKESHIRE BEWITCHED FOR
FIFTEEN YEARS FOR REFUSING ALMS TO AN OLD HAG.

Mrs. Mary Williams, Dwrbach, a very old woman, informed me, that about
55 years ago, there was a well-known witch in the neighbourhood of
Walton East, and that on one occasion two young women, daughters of
a farm in that part of the country, were taken ill quite suddenly,
and were supposed to have been witched by this old woman. The mother
of the two young women went to the witch and rebuked the old hag,
saying: "Old woman, why did you witch my daughters? Come and undo thy
wickedness." The old woman replied that she did not do anything to
them. But the mother still believing that she was guilty, compelled
her to come along with her to the farmhouse and undo her mischief. At
last, she came, and when they reached the door of the farmhouse, the
witch pronounced these words in Welsh: "Duw ai bendithio hi." (God
bless her). Any such expression pronounced by a witch freed the
bewitched person or an animal from the spell. One of the two sisters
(both of whom were in bed in another room), overheard these words of
the old woman, but her sister did not hear or at least did not catch
the words. The young woman who heard the supposed witch saying "Duw
a'i bendithio hi," got well at once, but her poor sister who missed
hearing, instead of recovering went worse, if anything, than before,
and continued to keep to her bed for fifteen years. And during all
these years she was so strange, that even when her own mother entered
her room, she would hide under the bed clothes like a rat, and her
food had to be left on her bed for her, for she would not eat in
the presence of anybody. At last, the old woman who was thought to
have witched the young woman, died, and as the the mortal remains of
the witch were decaying in the grave, the girl began to get better,
and she soon fully recovered and became quite herself again after
fifteen years' illness. My informant added that after recovering,
the young woman got married and received £1,500 from her parents on
her wedding-day, and that she is still alive (or was very lately)
and a wife of a well-to-do farmer. My informant also said that she
was well acquainted with the family.


