WITCHES AND THE MOUNTAIN ASH.

Of all things to frustrate the evil designs of witches the best was a
piece of mountain ash, or as it is called in Welsh "pren cerdinen." The
belief in mountain ash is very old in Wales, and the tree was held
sacred in ancient times, and some believe that the Cross of our
Lord was made of it. Witches had a particular dread of this wood,
so that a person who carried with him a branch of "pren cerdinen"
was safe from their spells; and it is believed in Wales, as well as
in parts of England, that the witch who was touched with a branch
of it was the victim carried off by the devil when he came next to
claim his tribute--once every seven years.

I was told a few years ago at Talybont, that many in that part of
Cardiganshire grew mountain ash in their gardens, and that a man
carrying home a little pig was seen with a branch of this wood to
protect the animal from witchcraft. In South Pembrokeshire many carry
in their pockets a twig of the mountain ash when going on a journey
late at night; and a woman at Llanddewi Brefi, in Cardiganshire,
Miss Anne Edwards, Penbontgoian, informed me about seven years ago
that when she was a child the neighbourhood was full of witches, but
nothing was so effective against them as the mountain ash; no witch
would come near it. A man travelling on horseback, especially at night,
was very much exposed to the old hags, and the horse was more so than
even the man riding the animal; but a branch or even a twig of the
mountain ash carried in hand and held over the horse's head, protected
both the animal and the rider against all the spells of witches. The
same woman informed me that on one occasion, the servant man and the
servant girl of Llanio Isaf, in that parish, were going to the mill
one night, but all of a sudden they found both themselves and their
horse and cart right on the top of a hedge. This was the work of the
witches. After this, they carried a mountain ash, so as to be safe.

Another old woman in Pembrokeshire, named Mrs. Mary Williams, Dwrbach,
informed me that a notorious old hag who was supposed to be a witch,
was coming home on one occasion from Haverfordwest fair, in a cart with
a farmer who had kindly taken her up. As they were driving along the
road between Haverfordwest and Walton East, they happened to notice
three teams harrowing in a field, and the farmer who was driving the
cart asked the witch whether she could by her spells stop the teams? "I
could stop two of them," said she, "but the third teamster has a piece
of mountain ash fast to his whip, so I cannot do anything to him."

Mrs. Mary Williams also informed me that when she was a little girl
her mother always used to say to her and the other children on the
last day of December: "Now children, go out and fetch a good supply
of mountain ash to keep the witches away on New Year's Day," and
branches of it were stuck into the wall about the door, windows and
other places outside. Then witches coming to beg on New Year's Day
could do no harm to the inmates of the house.

In Carmarthenshire, Cardiganshire, and North Pembrokeshire, the
mountain ash is called "pren cerdinen," but it was once known in the
South of Pembrokeshire, where the people are not of Welsh origin, as
"rontree"; and the name "rowan" is still retained in some parts of
England, which is derived according to Dr. Jameson, from the old Norse
"runa," a secret, or charm, on account of its being supposed to have
the power to avert the evil eye, etc.


