WIZARDS.

There were many conjurers in Wales in former times, and even at the
present day there are a few who have the reputation of practising
the Black Art; for we still hear occasionally of persons taking long
journeys to consult them, especially in cases of supposed bewitched
cattle, horses, pigs, etc. I have already given stories of conjurers
counteracting the machinations of witches, and delivering both
people and animals from their spell. But they were accredited with
the power to do many other things beside. They could, it was thought,
compel a thief to restore what he had stolen; could also reveal the
future and raise and command spirits.

The possibility of raising spirits, or to cause them to appear, was
once believed in in Wales, even in recent times; and Shakespeare in his
Henry the Fourth, Act III., S. 1., makes the Welshman, Glendower say:--


    "I can call Spirits from the vasty deep."


Wizards and others who practised magical arts were supposed to be
able to summon spirits at will; but it seems that some could not
control the demons after summoning them. An old man at Llandovery,
named Mr. Price, who was once a butler at Blaennos, informed me that
an old witch at Cilcwm, named Peggy, found it most difficult to control
the spirits in the house, and sometimes she had to go out into a field,
and stand within a circle of protection with a whip in her hand.

Conjurers possessed books dealing with the black art, which they
had to study most carefully, for it was thought that according to
the directions of magical books the spirits were controlled. It
was considered dangerous for one ignorant of the occult science to
open such books, as demons or familiar spirits came out of them,
and it was not always easy to get rid of such unearthly beings. An
old woman at Caio, in Carmarthenshire, informed me that the great
modern wizard Dr. Harries, of Cwrtycadno, who lived in that parish,
had one particular book kept chained and padlocked. The old woman
also added that people were much afraid of this book, and that even
the wizard himself was afraid of it, for he only ventured to open
it once in twelve months, and that in the presence and with the
assistance of another conjurer, a schoolmaster from Pencader, who
occasionally visited him. On a certain day once every twelve months,
Dr. Harries and his friend went out into a certain wooded spot not far
from the house, and after drawing a circle round them, they opened the
chained book. Whenever this ceremony was performed it caused thunder
and lightning throughout the Vale of Cothi. My informant vouched for
the truth of this, and stated that her husband had been a servant
to Harries.

A wizard in Pembrokeshire, named William Gwyn, of Olmws, Castell Newydd
Bach, with his magic book invoked a familiar spirit. The spirit came
and demanded something to do; William commanded him to bring some
water from the River in a riddle!

In the 18th century a well-known wizard in the same county was
one John Jenkins, a schoolmaster. But the greatest wizard in the
beginning of 19th century was Aby Biddle, of Millindingle, who was
in league with the evil one or at least many of the people in South
Pembrokeshire believed so. Aby Biddle's real name was Harries; but,
of course, he was not the same person as Harries of Cwrtycadno, in
Carmarthenshire. There are still many most curious stories concerning
him in South Pembrokeshire, and as typical of other tales, I give the
following story which appeared a few years ago in "The Welsh Tit Bits"
column of the "Cardiff Times:"--


