THE PRIESTS AND THE HORNETS.

In the winter of 1803 there was an evening gathering at the ----
Vicarage, which consisted chiefly of clerics, and Aby Biddle was
of the number of the guests, having been invited as a source of
pastime to help beguile some of the long hours of that forsaken
spot. Seldom did he go beyond the solemn dingle, but he had been
prevailed upon on this occasion. Much merriment was expected, nor was
the expectation misleading, save that it was entirely at the expense
of the clerics. The hours glided along gently on the wings of fairy
tales. The party remained until the small hours of the morning,
singing, merry-making, and tale-telling in turn. The conversation
now furtively drifted in the direction of occult science. Aby Biddle
sat near the window. Every now and again as he listened to the words
magic and witchcraft and various opinions respecting them, he pulled
back a corner of the blind and the pale light of the moon flickered
on his countenance, revealing the lines of a retreating smile.

A loquacious young cleric interposed a caustic remark at this point and
fanned the fire into flame, and the discussion was like to have taken a
somewhat lively turn had not a broad-browed divine on whose head rested
the snow of full three score winters and ten, sternly rebuked the young
priest. This divine denounced sorcery and conjuration in unmeasured
language. Another aged divine of Puritanic air nodded his assent.

Aby Biddle said nothing, though some of the company invited him to
speak, but played carefully with the fringe of the curtain. During a
momentary lull in the conversation, he rose suddenly, paced the room
for a minute or two, and disappeared into the lawn. He was not gone
many seconds before he returned with three small rings in his hands. He
held these up and remarked, "Gentlemen, we'll see whether conjuring
is possible or not." He placed the rings on the floor, at a distance
of about a yard apart, and hurriedly left the room, taking care to
turn the key in the lock on the smooth side of the door. The priests
turned their gaze intently in the direction of the rings. Suddenly
there appeared in one of the rings a fly flitting and buzzing. The fly
grew. In half a minute or less it had grown into a monster hornet. No
sooner had this metamorphosis taken place than it frisked into one
of the other rings, and another fly appeared in its place. This one
also developed into a hornet, giving way, when fully formed, to a
third fly. Each ring was now occupied, and the clerics wondered what
next would happen. Little time had they for musing, for the third
fly quickly accomplished its transformation, when the first one left
the ring and flew through the room. New hornets appeared in quick and
quicker succession. The guests became now thoroughly alarmed. Priestly
amusement gave way to pallid amazement. More and more came the dreaded
hornets, louder and louder their droning hum. They filled the room,
they darkened the whitened ceiling, and insinuated themselves into the
hoary locks of the Puritanic divine so that he yelled hoarsely. It
was utter confusion, and all were rushing wildly here and there for
refuge or escape, when the conjuror reappeared with a merry laugh,
and a loud "Ho! is conjuring possible now, gentlemen?" The Cloth was
soon pacified, the hornets dismissed to their sylvan home, and the
reputation of the Aby Biddle established as a mighty magician in the
minds of some noted parsons of Pembrokeshire.


