THE HARRIESES OF CWRTYCADNO, THE POPULAR MODERN WIZARDS.

The most popular and greatest wizards of modern days were undoubtedly
the Harrieses of Cwrtycadno, in Carmarthenshire.

John Harries lived at Pantcoy, Cwrtycadno, in the Parish of Caio,
and died in the year 1839. His sons were also popular conjurers,
one of whom only died about 45 years ago.

Harries was a medical man, an astrologer, and a wizard, and people
came to enquire of his oracle from all parts of Wales, and from the
English borders, especially Herefordshire, and his name was familiar
through the length and breadth of the land. It is said that he had a
wonderful power over lunatics; could cure diseases; charm away pain;
protect people from witches, and foretell future events, etc. Good many
stories are told of him by old people, and I have already introduced
his name in my account of witches.

I was told by an old man, Mr. David Evans, a millwright from Llandilo,
that the popularity of Harries as a wizard originated as follows:--A
young woman somewhere in that part of the country was lost, and could
not be found after searching for her everywhere; at last her relations
and friends went to Cwrtycadno to consult Dr. Harries. The wizard
informed them that the girl had been murdered by her sweetheart, and
that he had hid her body in the earth, under the shades of a tree,
in the hollow of which they would find a bee's nest. The tree stood
alone near a brook. The searching party at last came across the spot
indicated by the conjurer, and here they found the young woman's body
buried, as the wise man had told them. The young man who had murdered
the girl was found, and confessed the crime. When the authorities of
the law became aware of these facts, the wizard was brought before
the magistrates, at Llandovery, where he was charged with knowing and
abetting of murder, otherwise he could not have known she was murdered,
and where she was buried. He was, however, discharged. According to
the "History of Caio," by F. S. Price, an interesting book presented
to me by Lady Hills-Johnes, the wizard told the magistrates (Lloyd,
Glansevin, and Gwyn, Glanbran), that if they would tell him the hour
they were born, he would tell them the hour they would die!


