HOW TO OBTAIN THE FAMILIAR OF THE GENIUS OR GOOD SPIRIT AND CAUSE
HIM TO APPEAR.

"After the manner prescribed by Magicians, the exorcist must inform
himself of the name of his Good Genius, which he may find in the Rules
of the Travins and Philermus; as also, what Chonactes and Pentacle,
or Larim, belongs to every Genius. After this is done, let him compose
an earnest prayer unto the said Genius, which he must repeat thrice
every morning for seven days before the Invocation.... When the day
is come wherein the Magician would invocate his prayer to Genius
he must enter into a private closet, having a little table and silk
carpet, and two waxen candles lighted; as also a chrystal stone shaped
triangularly about the quantity of an apple which stone must be fixed
upon a frame in the centre of the table; and then proceeding with
great devotion to Invocation, he must thrice repeat the former prayer,
concluding the same with Pater Noster, etc., and a missale de Spiritu
Sancto. Then he must begin to consecrate the candles, carpet, table
and chrystal, sprinkling the same with his own blood, and saying:
I do by the power of the holy Names Aglaon, Eloi, Eloi Sabbathon,
Anepheraton, Jah, Agian, Jah, Jehovah; Immanuel, Archon, Archonton,
Sadai, Sadai, Jeovaschah, etc., sanctifie and consecrate these holy
utensils to the performance of this holy work, in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. Which done, the Exorcist must say
the following prayer with his face towards the East, and kneeling with
his back to the consecrated table:--O thou blessed Phanael my angel
guardian, vouchsafe to descend with thy holy influence and presence
into this spotless chrystal, that I may behold thy glory, etc. This
prayer being first repeated towards the East, must be afterwards said
towards all the four winds thrice. And next the 70th Psalm repeated
out of a Bible that hath been consecrated in like manner as the rest of
the utensils, which ceremonies being seriously performed, the Magician
must arise from his knees and sit before the chrystal bareheaded with
the consecrated Bible in his hand and the waxen candle newly lighted
waiting patiently and internally for the coming and appearance of
the Genius.... Now about a quarter of an hour before the spirit come,
there will appear great variety of apparitions within the glass; as
first a beaten road or tract, and travellers, men, and women marching
silently along. Next there will be rivers, wells, mountains, and seas
appear, after that, a shepherd upon a pleasant hill feeding a goodly
flock of sheep, and the sun shining brightly at his going down; and
lastly, innumerable flows of birds and beasts, monsters and strange
appearance, and which will all vanish at the appearance of the Genius.

"The Genius will be familiar in the stone at the performance of
the wizard."

The following story of this Welsh wizard's spirit summoning was
related to me a short time ago by a clergyman who is a native of
Carmarthenshire, the Rev. J. Phillips, vicar of Llancynfelyn:


