THE WIZARD OF CWRTYCADNO FORETELLING THE FUTURE DESTINY OF A NEW
BORN CHILD.

Owen Evans, Maesydderwen, near Llansawel, Carmarthenshire, an old
man of 90 years of age, informed me about four years ago that on
one occasion, long ago, when a baby, a girl, was born to him and
his wife, he went to Dr. Harries, Cwrtycadno, to consult him about
the future destiny of the child. The conjurer spoke to him something
as follows:--"I hope you will not be distressed when you hear what
is going to happen to your dear child; but the truth of it is, she
will have a very narrow escape from drowning at the age of four,
and death awaits her at the age of twenty!" My informant then went
on to tell me with tears in his eyes, that everything took place
exactly as Harries told him. His dear girl at the age of four one
day, whilst playing and running along the river side (River Cothy),
fell over the banks into the water and nearly got drowned. After this,
she never enjoyed good health, and at the age of twenty she died!

Owen Evans informed me that when he went to Cwrtycadno, several other
men accompanied him there, and one of them was named John Lloyd, who
was a perfect stranger to Dr. Harries. But the wise man through his
knowledge of the occult science, was able to tell this stranger that
he had a mole on his head, and had met with an accident on his leg,
which was true. My informant also added that the wizard "set great
importance on the Planet under which a man was born."

Mr. Thomas Davies, Penybont, Llanddewi Brefi, over 90 years of age,
vouched for the truth of the following account:--Many years ago,
Wiliam Davies, Pistill Gwyn Bach, Llanddewi Brefi, in Cardiganshire,
had lost some money, and could not find it, so he went to Cwrtycadno,
to consult Dr. Harries about it. The Conjurer told him where to find
the money, and warned him to keep away from fairs, lest some accident
should befall him. Wiliam was very careful for a time, but at last a
son of his got married, and persuaded him to accompany him to a fair
at Lampeter. He went, and was thrown down by a horse, and died in a
few days.

It is said in the neighbourhood of Caio that Dr. Harries had foretold
the death of the Late Lamented Judge Johnes, of Dolaucothy, about
thirty years before it took place. Mr. Johnes, who was highly
respected, was cowardly murdered by a native of Ireland in 1876.

Mr. D. Owen (Brutus), in his book "Brutusiana" which was published
in 1840, condemns the wizard for his fortune telling:


   "The first day of winter.
    Severe is the weather,
    Unlike the first Summer,
    None but God can foresee what is to come."

                              Druidical "Warrior Song."


