THE CONJURER AND THE LOST OX.

Mr. Thomas Jones, Brunant Arms, Caio, gave me the following account of
what took place about 55 years ago, when his father lived at Penlifau,
in the parish of Cilcwm, on the mountain side, and near the road which
leads over the mountain from Cilcwm to Cwmcothi. A young farmer who
lived at a place called Foshwyaid, Cwm Du, near Talley, has taken some
cattle to Caio fair, in the month of August. Somehow or other, one of
his oxen went astray from the Fair, and could not be seen anywhere
in the neighbourhood. The young farmer and others went in every
direction in search of the animal, but returned disappointed. At last,
the man went to Cwrtycadno, to consult the "Dyn Hysbys." The wise man
informed him that his ox had wandered away from the Fair, at first in
a northernly, and afterwards in an easterly direction, "and" said he,
"if you take the road leading from here over the mountain to Cilcwm,
you will meet a man (the conjurer gave a description of the man)
who is likely to know something, or at least give you some clue to
your lost animal."

The young farmer then went on his way, and after proceeding for some
distance, he did meet a man as the conjurer had told him, and he told
him all his troubles. Now this very man happened to be my informant's
father who lived close by. Mr. Jones sympathised very much with the
young farmer, and though a stranger, invited him home with him to
get something to eat, and he accordingly went, and at the house,
they talked together for some time. At last, the young farmer had
to proceed again on his journey, rather disappointed, as his new
friend who had showed every kindness, could give him no information
about his lost ox. Jones went with him for a short distance, just to
show him a path (a short cut) leading from the house to the road; and
after bidding each other farewell, they parted. But before the young
farmer had gone far, Jones called him back, and informed him that he
had just recollected hearing some men, when coming home from Cilcwm
Church last Sunday, talking together about some new ox which they had
not noticed before in the field or yard of Tim. Davies, Gweungreuddyn
(a path from the Church went close by T. D.'s farm). When he heard
this bit of news from Jones, off he went at once as fast as he could
go to Mr. Timothy Davies; and to his great joy, when he arrived
there, found his stray animal quite safe in the "ffald." The local
authorities had discovered the ox wandering about the country; but
before the young farmer was allowed to take his animal home with him,
the sum of seven shillings was to be paid for faldage. The young man
went back to Jones, obtained the loan of seven shillings which he
repaid honestly after arriving home with his ox.

My informant also added that the conjurer had addressed the same young
farmer as follows:--"My poor fellow, you are in great sorrow," "No"
said the farmer, "Yes" said the conjurer again, "you have buried your
mother a few weeks ago." The man then confessed that this was quite
true. The wise man added, "A more melancholy event still awaits you
at the end of twelve months." And at the end of twelve months the
young farmer himself died!

Watkin Evans, Blaenpark, informed me that a farmer in the parish of
Dihewyd, Cardiganshire, found a harrow which he had lost by consulting
a conjurer.

One John Evans, of Llanddarog, in Carmarthenshire, 85 years ago, lost
a bull, but he found the animal at Morfa, Kidwelly, by consulting
a conjurer.



