MERLIN.

I have in the preceding pages given some instances of modern and
mediæval magicians or wizards; but divination astrology and magic
in this country are of very ancient date. The names of Idris Gawr,
Gwyddion, the Diviner by Trees, and Gwyn, the son of Nud, have come
down to us from prehistoric times. So great was these three's knowledge
of the stars, that they could foretell whatever might be desired to
know until the day of doom. In Welsh Mythology, several even of the
kingly families are represented as playing the role of magicians,
especially Rhiannon, the daughter of Heveydd Hen. Math Ap Mathonwy,
King of Gwynedd, could form a maiden out of flowers, and transform
men into deers and wolves, etc. But, perhaps, the greatest of all the
wizards was Myrddin, or Merlin as he is known among English readers,
who lived about the beginning of the sixth century. Myrddin was born
in the neighbourhood of Carmarthen, or at least so it is believed;
and it is also believed that the meaning of Carmarthen is Myrddin's
town, and the people of Carmarthen to this day feel proud of such
a famous prophet who was born in their town. Merlin (or Myrddin)'s
fame spread throughout all the Western parts of Europe, if not to
other parts of the world, and his mighty magic adorned the tales
of romance, and in the tenth century one eminent scholar on the
Continent, went as far as to write, a commentary on his prophecies
or prognostications. But to confine ourselves to Welsh writers,
we have some account of Merlin by Nennius in the eighth century,
and by Geoffrey of Monmouth in the twelfth.

Geoffrey says:--"Vortigern, after the infamous treachery of the long
knives, retreated to Mount Erir--which is Eryri, or snowden--and here
he ordered the building of a great tower of defence, whose foundations,
however, were swallowed up by the earth as fast as they were filled
in." The Magicians, on hearing this, said he must procure the blood of
"a youth that never had a father," and sprinkle it on the stones and
mortar. Vortigern, accordingly, sent messengers to different parts of
the country in search of such a youth; and "in their travels they came
to a city, called, afterwards, Caermerdin, where they saw some young
men playing before the gate, and went up to them; but being weary
with their journey, they sat them down there.... Towards evening,
there happened on a sudden a quarrel between two of the young men,
whose names were Merlin and Dalbutius. In the dispute, Dalbutius said
to Merlin, 'As for you, nobody knows what you are, for you never had
a father.' At that word the messengers looked earnestly upon Merlin,
and asked who he was. They learnt it was not known who was his father,
but that his mother was daughter to the King of Dimetia, and that
she lived in St. Peter's Church, among the nuns of the city."

Merlin and his mother at the request of the messengers accompanied
them from Carmarthen to Snowdon to the presence of King Vortigern;
and when the boy was asked who was his father, his mother in reply
gave a very peculiar account of the birth of her son, whose father she
declared was a supernatural being, and so had no human father. Then
the King said to Merlin, "I must have thy blood." And when the youth
asked the King what good could his blood be more than the blood of
any other man, he was informed in reply that the twelve wise men
or bards had suggested the blood of a youth in order to make the
building stand. Then Merlin asked the bards or magicians what was
the real cause that the building of the tower was not a success? But
they could give no answer. Young Merlin now upraided them for their
ignorance and the cruelty of their suggestion. He then gave orders to
dig the ground, and when this was done a lake was discovered. Merlin
drained this lake, and at the bottom, as he had predicted, a stone
chest was discovered in which there were two sleeping dragons. These,
whenever they awoke, fought with each other, and their violence shook
the ground, thus causing "the work to fall." When the King commanded
the stone chest to be opened the two dragons came out and began a
fierce battle. One of these dragons was white and the other red. At
first the white dragon drove the red one to the middle of the pool,
then the red one, provoked to rage, drove the white one thither in
turn. When the King asked what this should signify, Merlin exclaimed
as follows:--"Woe to the red dragon for her calamity draws nigh,
and the white dragon shall seize on her cells. By the white dragon
the Saxons are signified, and the Britons by the red one, which the
white shall overcome. Then shall the mountains be made plains, and
the glens and rivers flow with blood. The Saxons shall possess almost
all the island from sea to sea, and afterwards our nation shall arise,
and bravely drive the Saxons beyond the sea." Nennius, chap. 43.

The old King Vortigern then left the neighbourhood of Snowdon, and
removed to South Wales, and built a fort or a Castle on a spot known
to this day as Craig Gwrtheyrn, or Vortigern's Rock, near Llandyssul
and Pencader.

The white and the red dragons respectively symbolised the Celtic and
Saxon races, and Merlin's prophecy concerning the final overthrow of
the Saxons by the Britons made a deep and lasting impression on the
minds of the Welsh people for ages, and even nearly nine hundred
years after Merlin's time. Owen Glyndwr found these prophecies
highly instrumental in his favour when fighting against the
English. According to a little book which I have in my possession
entitled, "Prophwydoliaeth Myrddin Wyllt," (Merlin's prophecy), one
Owen Lawgoch, who is tarrying in a foreign land, is to drive out the
Saxons, and become King under the title of Henry the ninth. Welshmen of
the present day, however, believe that Merlin's prophecy was fulfilled
in the year 1485, when Henry VII., a Welshman leading a Welsh army
to Bosworth Field, became King of England.

There are also many prophecies here and there attributed to Merlin;
some of which have been fulfilled, and others to be fulfilled in the
future. He had foretold even of the railway train running along the
Vale of Towy, which prediction has proved true:


   "Fe ddaw y gath a'r wenci ar hyd Glan Towi i lawr;
    Fe ddaw y milgi a'r llwynog i Aberhonddu fawr."

   "The cat and the weasel shall come down along the banks of Towy;
    The greyhound and the fox shall come into the town of Aber honddu,"

                                                               (Brecon).


It is believed that the train has fulfilled these sayings.

In the Vale of Towy, near Abergwili, there is a large stone in a
field belonging to Tyllwyd farm. I went to see it myself, and several
people in the neighbourhood informed me that a young man was killed
when digging under this stone in search of hidden treasure, and that
Merlin had prophesied about this.

According to another prophecy of Merlin a fearful catastrophe awaits
the town of Carmarthen:--


   "Llanllwch a fu,
    Caerfyrddin a sudd,
    Abergwili a saif."

    (Llanllwch has been,
    Carmarthen shall sink,
    Abergwili shall stand).


   "Caerfyrddin, cei oer fore,
    Daear a'th lwnc, dwr i'th le."

    (Carmarthen, thou shalt have a cold morning,
    Earth shall swallow thee, water into thy place).


The people of the neighbourhood even to this very day, more than
half believe that Carmarthen is to sink. At the end of a long street
in that town there is an old tree known as Merlin's Tree, in a very
withered condition. Every care is taken to protect it from falling,
as Merlin had prophesied that when this tree shall tumble down,
the town of Carmarthen shall sink.


   "When Merlin's Tree shall tumble down.
    Then shall fall Carmarthen town!"

                         (A Prophecy of Merlin).


According to another prophecy attributed to the same ancient wizard,
Carmarthen is to sink when Llyn Eiddwen, a lake in Cardiganshire,
dries up.

It is said that Merlin had predicted that a bull would go right to
the top of the tower of St. Peter's Church, Carmarthen, and that a
calf fulfilled this prophecy.

My cousin, the Rev. Joseph Evans, the Rector of Jordanston, in
Pembrokeshire, informed me a few years ago that one mile from the
town of Fishguard, there is a farm called Tregroes, respecting which
Merlin prophesied that it would be in the middle of the town some
day. There are now signs that this ancient prophecy is likely to be
fulfilled. September 4th, 1909, the Royal Mail Ship, Mauretania, the
finest and fastest liner afloat, inaugurated the new Transatlantic
Service from New York to Fishguard, so that there is a great future
before the place as indicated by Merlin of old. It is also interesting
to note that the captain of the Mauretania was a Welshman (Pritchard),
and the first passenger to land was also a Welshman, named Mr. Jenkin
Evans, brother to the Rector of Jordanston.

I have been informed that a relation of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, lives at this very house respecting which Merlin had
prophesied.

General Gwynne, a fine old gentleman I met a short time ago at the
house of my genial friend, Col. Gwynne-Hughes, of Glancothy, wrote
to me as follows respecting another remarkable prophecy of Merlin
and its fulfilment:--


   "Glancothy, Carmarthenshire, Oct. 12, 1909.

    Dear Mr. Davies,--


    I have heard you are writing a book on the Folk-Lore of
    Wales. Perhaps the following may be of use to you.

    Some time in the forties, when I was at the College at Llandovery,
    my sister, Madam ---- speaking of our old property Glanbran,
    at that time mortgaged, said, there is an old Welsh saying
    attributed to Merlin to the effect that the Gwynnes should be at
    Glanbran until a man standing at Dover could speak to another at
    Calais. Years after, when I was in India, about the year when the
    telephone or telegraph was perfected between France and England,
    a document was sent out to me for my signature, which was my
    final release to the Glanbran Estate as the youngest son of the
    late Col. Sackville Gwynne of Glanbran Park.


    Yours sincerely,
    NADOLIG GWYNNE.


According to Giraldus Cambrensis, Merlin had prophesied that a
King of England and Conqueror of Ireland, should die in crossing
"Llechllafar," a stone of great size which was placed across the
stream dividing the cemetery of St. David's from the north side of
the Church to form a bridge. When Henry II. passed over it on his
return from Ireland a frantic woman called upon Llechllafar to kill
him according to Merlin's prophecy.

"The King, who had heard the prophecy, approaching tie stone, stopped
for a short time at the foot of it, and, looking earnestly at it,
boldly passed over; then, turning round, and looking towards the stone,
thus indignantly inveighed against the prophet: 'Who will hereafter
give credit to the lying Merlin?' A person standing by, and observing
what had passed, in order to vindicate the injury done to the prophet,
replied, with a loud voice, 'Thou art not that King of whom Ireland
is to be conquered, or of whom Merlin prophesied!'"

According to an ancient tradition, this stone spoke or groaned once
when a corpse was carried over it.

I was informed by many persons who live in the neighbourhood of
Abergwili, near Carmarthen, that Merlin was such a giant that he
could jump over the Vale of Towy.


