PEMBROKESHIRE WOMAN'S PROPHECY FULFILLED.

The following appeared in the "Pembrokeshire County Guardian":--


   "About one hundred and sixty years ago, there lived on a farm near
    Spittal in Pembrokeshire, a man of the name of David Evans. He
    had a family of five children: Thomas, the eldest, was born
    on November 3, 1756, and married Sarah Bevan, of Martel Mill,
    on Sunday, November 14, 17--, and they lived on a small farm
    near Trefgarn Rocks, called Penyfeidr. This Sarah Bevan, or
    Mrs. Evans was, like her husband, noted for her piety, and among
    her neighbours was possibly more noted for her visions and her
    ability to foresee and foretell coming events, of which there
    are many reliable records still existing and talked of in the
    district to this day. Entering the house one day, she told those
    present that she had just seen a most remarkable sight below the
    house in Trefgarn Valley, and described it as a large number of
    heavily laden carts or waggons going very fast one after the other,
    and no bullock or horses drawing them, but the first one appeared
    from the smoke she saw, to be on fire. George Stephenson was the
    first to introduce steam locomotive power into practical use in
    the year 1825. So we may state with certainty that the rustics
    of Pembrokeshire had no idea or knowledge whatever of the railway
    train at the time that Mrs. Evans saw the vision. About 54 years
    ago the railway was brought into Pembrokeshire, and the scheme
    of the great engineer, Brunel, was to extend it to the sea shore
    near Fishguard. With this in view, much work was accomplished in
    cuttings and embankments in Trefgarn Valley, which are now to be
    seen there. The country people were jubilant, expecting soon to
    realise the prophetic vision. But strong influence was brought to
    bear on Brunel, and finally he abandoned that route and took the
    line to New Milford instead. And the vision and prophecy came to
    nought. Afterwards the old people looked forward to the joining
    of Fishguard and Goodwick with the main line, and believed the
    truth of the story. But, alas! when the branch line was made,
    it was many miles to the North of Trefgarn, and the old lady and
    her vision were once more ridiculed, and apparently, there were
    no further grounds for hoping that the prophecy would be fulfilled.

   "When the project of the G. W. Ry. Co. got matured, it was found
    that the old loop line via Letterston was not suitable for a fast
    and direct service from Goodwick to London. So it was decided
    to make a new line from Goodwick through Trefgarn Valley,--thus
    re-adopting Brunel's original scheme. And last week I actually saw
    'a large number of heavily laden carts or waggons going very fast,
    one after the other, and no bullocks or horses pulling them, but
    the first one appeared from the smoke I saw, to be on fire.' Just
    as described, and in the very spot indicated by Mrs. Evans about
    100 years ago.


   "H.W.E.

   "Solva, December 26th, 1905."


The people of Pembrokeshire have been remarkable for their insight
into the future; navvies were heard making railway cuttings many years
before the introduction of steam locomotive power into practical use.

I have been informed that the sound of a railway engine, whistling,
was heard at Llanilar, in Cardiganshire, fifty years before a railway
was constructed through the neighbourhood; and it is also said that
the sound of blasting was heard at Tyngraig, between Ystrad Meurig
and Llanafan, where afterwards a tunnel was made. My informants were
Mrs. Lloyd, the Vicarage, Llanilar, and Mr. Jones, Tyncoed.


