MERLIN'S FATE.

The end or final fate of Merlin is surrounded by mysteries. A few years
ago when I was staying in the neighbourhood of Carmarthen, Merlin's
Hill (Bryn Myrddin) was pointed out to me where the great magician
still lives (so they say) in a cave in that hill, and held there in
imprisonment by an artful woman who contrived his disappearance from
among human beings. Moreover, it is added, that if you listen in the
twilight, you will hear his groans, and also the clanking of the iron
chains which hold him bound. Others say he is heard working in this
underground prison.

It seems from Spenser's "Faerie Queen," however, that according to
another ancient tradition, Merlin's place of confinement is, or was,
a cave near Dynevor, in the neighbourhood of Llandilo:

"And if you ever happen that same way to traveill, go to see that
dreadful place. It is an hideous hollow cave (they say) under a
rock that lyes a little apace emongst the woody hilles of Dynevowre
(Dynevor), etc."

Some stories describe Merlin as being held spellbound in a bush
of white thorns in the woods of Bresilien in Brittany. Others say
that he died, and was buried at Bardsey Island. But according to the
Triads he went to sea and sailed in a house of glass, and was never
heard of any more. In this voyage, Merlin took with him the thirteen
curiosities of Britain, which were:--

1. Llen Arthur (the veil of Arthur), which made the person who put
it on invisible.

2. Dyrnwyn.

3. Corn Brangaled (the horn of Brangaled), which furnished any
liquor desired.

4. Cadair, neu car Morgan mwynfawr (the chair or car of Morgan
Mwynfawr), which would carry a person seated in it wherever he wished
to go.

5. Mwys Gwyddno (the hamper of Gwyddno), meat for one being put into
it, would become meat for a hundred.

6. Hogalen Tudno (the whetstone of Tudno), which would sharpen none
but the weapon of a brave man.

7. Pais Padarn (the cloak of Padarn).

8. Pair Drynog (the caldron of Drynog), none but the meat of a brave
man would boil in it.

9. Dysgyl a gren Rhydderch (the dish and platter of Rhydderch),
any meat desired would appear on it.

10. Tawlbwrdd (a chess board, or, rather backgammon board), the ground
gold, and the men silver, and the men would play themselves.

11. Mantell (a robe).

12. Modrwy Eluned (the ring of Eluned), whoever put it on his finger
could make himself invisible.

13. Cyllell Llawfrodedd,--which was a kind of knife with which the
Druids killed their victims for sacrifices.

"The story of Merlin and Vivian as told in Brittany," translated from
the French-Breton magazine "L'Hermine," edited by M. Tiercelin, is
given in Part X. of the Transactions of the Carmarthenshire Antiquarian
Society, from which I give the following short extract--Viviane,
the love-making temptress, had enchanted the enchanter (Merlin). He
sleeps, says the legend, in the forest of Broceliande, vaulted
by an impenetrable hedge, on the bank of the fountain of love,
his head resting on the knees of Viviane; the enchanter enchanted;
and nobody has yet awakened the Celtic Orpheus from his eternal
slumber. "Ne onques puis Merlin ne issit de ceste tour, où sa mie,
Viviane l'avait mis."


