DREAMS.

A dream was a common way of making known the will of God to the
prophets of old. We know from the Bible that important dreams took
place in the early ages of the world, and Welsh people, like other
nations, believe in the importance of these mysterious night visions,
and of their power of forecasting the future, and there are both
men and women all over the country who can give instances of dreams
which came true. There are, undoubtedly, some persons whose dreams,
as a rule, are reliable; whilst the dreams of others are not to be
depended on. It is also said that morning twilight dreams are more
reliable than other dreams; and it is believed that a dream which is
repeated is more to be relied on than that which occurs only once. I
have had most striking dreams myself; indeed almost everything that
happens to me has been presaged by a dream. About nine years ago
I dreamed that I was delivering a lecture to a large audience, and
speaking most fluently. On awaking, I had a distinct recollection of
every word I had uttered; and I am now very sorry that I did not write
down next morning the lecture which I had delivered in my dream. The
most remarkable fact is this: Previous to my dream I had no knowledge
whatever of the subject on which I lectured, as I had never studied
the subject in my life, and as a psychological curiosity I may mention
that by means of my dream I had become possessed of knowledge on a
particular subject which would have taken me at least a whole month's
hard study to acquire. (I am, of course, used to public speaking).

I have taken notes of few of my latest dreams, and perhaps it would
not be out of place to record here a remarkable dream which I dreamt
just before this book was going to press:

One night in January, 1910, I dreamed that I was walking near
St. Bride's, the country seat of Lord Kensington, in Pembrokeshire,
and I met Lord Kensington himself, who spoke to me thus: "Go into
the house, Lady Kensington is home, and I'll be with you in a few
minutes." Then I went to the door and rang the bell, and the butler
took me into the drawing-room. After waiting in the room alone for
some time without seeing anyone, all the household servants came
to me in a group, dressed in their holiday attire, and informed me
that Lady Kensington was not home after all, but that her Ladyship
had gone away and had got lost somewhere in going about, and that
Lord Kensington was seeking in vain for her everywhere, but failing
to find her anywhere. When I awoke from my dream I felt certain that
something had happened to one of the Kensingtons. A day or two after
my dream I was surprised to read in the papers that a cable-gram was
received in London from Calcutta, announcing the death of Dowager
Lady Kensington in India. I discovered that her death took place
on the very date of my dream, and that a few days previously Lord
Kensington had hurriedly left for India, having received news of the
Dowager's serious condition.

In order to add to the interest of the dream, I may state that the very
day before I dreamt, I expected every moment to hear of the Dowager's
return to England, as her Ladyship knew one or two interesting
"traditions of Bridget of Ireland, known as St. Bride," which she
intended to write down for me in order to record them in this book,
to which she was looking forward, as she was greatly interested in
Welsh traditions, especially those of Pembrokeshire.

One night, about seventeen years ago, when I was spending a few days at
Penmachno, in North Wales, where I had delivered a lecture, I dreamt
that I was receiving a letter; and when I looked at the envelope,
I recognised the handwriting at once as that of Lady Hills-Johnes,
of Dolaucothy. I then opened the letter and read it all through, and
found it was from her Ladyship; and when I awoke up from my sleep I
remembered every word of its contents. In the morning as soon as I went
down for breakfast, the landlady of the house delivered me a letter
which had come by post. I looked at the envelope as I had done in my
dream; it was from Lady Hills-Johnes; and when I read it, I discovered
that I knew every word of its contents beforehand from my dream.

When I was in Australia ten years ago, I had another remarkable dream
about Dolaucothy, just when Sir James Hills-Johnes was leaving home
for South Africa, to see his friend Lord Roberts, during the War;
but I have been asked by Lady Hill-Johnes not to publish the dream.

A remarkable fulfilment of a dream was reported in the "Aberystwyth
Observer" in the year 1888, in relation to the sudden death of the
late Colonel Pryse, an uncle of Viscountess Parker, and Great-uncle
of Sir Edward Webley-Parry-Pryse, Bart., of the ancient Family of
Gogerddan:--"It was not considered safe to break to Viscountess
Parker the news of her uncle's death for some days, and Mr. Fryer
went up to London to convey to her the information. On his arrival at
her residence, in Montague Square, a maid announced to her Ladyship
his arrival. 'Mr. Fryer!' she said, 'I know what it is. My uncle is
dead. He died on a lane leading from Rhiwarthen to Penwern. I have
dreamt four times in four years that this would happen, and the last
time was the night before baby was born. I have tried many times to
keep him from going that way. Ask Mr. Fryer to come up.' She afterwards
said that she meant the road leading to Penuwch which is in the same
direction, and that she would know the spot."

The editor of "Blackwood" gives authenticity to the following
dream:--A young man, engaged in a china manufactory at Swansea,
about the beginning of the last century, dreamed that he saw a man
drowning in one of their pools; he dreamed the same a second time,
and a third time, and then could not resist making an effort to rise
and satisfy himself that it was not so. He did rise, went to the spot,
and found the man drowned. A man in the neighbourhood of Newcastle
Emlyn, dreamed a similar dream in the 18th century.

The late Rev. J. E. Jenkins, Rector of Vaynor, in Breconshire, in
his interesting book on that parish gives the following account of
a girl saved by a dream:--

"The Rev. Williams Jones, afterwards Canon Jones, was curate in sole
charge here in 1822, and for many years afterwards. The Old Rectory
House and the Glebe land was at that time occupied by a man named Enos
Davies and his family. The Rev. W. Jones also had rooms at the Rectory.

"One morning at the end of May in that year, about two o'clock Enos
had a remarkable dream. He dreamt the Church was on fire. He suddenly
awoke, and in great excitement jumped out of bed and knocked at the
bedroom door of Mr. Jones, and cried:--'Master! Master! come down
at once, I have dreamt the Church is on fire.' The worthy divine
laughed at him, and told him to go back to bed, and not to give heed
to foolish dreams and nightly visions. Enos obeyed, but could not
sleep. During the day Mr. Jones walked down to the Church, and found
everything in the usual order, safe and uninjured. The following
morning, at the same hour, strange to say, Enos had the same dream,
and again disturbed the peaceful slumbers of his good master. 'Come
down to Church, Master,' said he, 'there must be something wrong,
I have again dreamt the Church is on fire.' 'All right Enos,' said
Mr. Jones; 'I will come with you, it is a fine morning.' By the time
they reached the Church it was half-past three. Coming-down the Lych
Gate, which was close by the little brook--the old entrance--they
were struck with a great awe and a terrified feeling came over them,
for they heard a peculiar sound coming, as it were, from the direction
of the Church. They stood, listened, and looked at each other in mute
astonishment, and Enos's hair stood on end. The sound became plainer:
it was like the sound of a sexton digging or opening a grave inside
the Church, as was often the custom in those days. Enos trembled,
and became as pale as death; whilst the clergyman, who was a tall
strongly built man, entered the churchyard, and stealthily went to
listen at the west door. He could distinctly hear a man digging a
grave. Mr. Jones soon found that an entrance had been made into the
Church through one of the north side windows. Re-tracing his steps to
Enos, who was still standing on the road by the brook, his attention
was directed to a young girl coming down the steep pathway over Cae
Burdudd--'the field of carnage'--the field where the mound is. She came
running down merrily, and in a pleasant manner, said--'good morning,
Mr. Jones, you are here before me.' 'Yes, my girl,' said the curate,
'where are you going so early?' 'Coming to be married, to be sure;'
was her joyous reply. The curate took in the situation in a moment and
told her:--'You have made a mistake as to the time. You must wait till
eight o'clock; I cannot marry you before eight. Go up to the Rectory
to Mrs. Davies and get some breakfast; we shall come after you in
a short time. We will wait here until John comes, and will bring
him up.' The innocent girl departed as requested, but had not gone
far when the south door of the church was opened from within by her
treacherous lover. He was at once apprehended by the courageous curate
and Enos, and was made to stand over the grave he had prepared for the
girl he had shamefully deceived and ruined, and whom he had intended
murdering. He pleaded hard for mercy, and, ultimately, in order to
avoid public scandal, on his promising to leave the neighbourhood
immediately, and never again to return to Vaynor, he was allowed to
depart. He was a native of Herefordshire, and was at this time in a
service at a well-known farm in the parish. He left at once, and was
never heard of afterwards by anyone from this parish. The curate, in
a calm, gentle way, partly detailed to the maid the evil intentions
of her base lover, and stated how God, in his good providence by the
means of a dream, had preserved her from an untimely death.

"The young girl was terribly shocked, and fell unconscious into the
arms of the curate. She lost her health, and after a time was taken
home to the neighbourhood of Knighton, and in a few months later
news reached Vaynor that the poor girl had died of a broken heart,
and the curate was asked to go up to bury her, but failed to go. The
above account was given me by my predecessor, the Rev. Rees Williams,
and was confirmed by the testimony of the late Mrs. Thomas, formerly
of Cwm and others. Mrs. Evans, late of Pengellifach, however, added
that the would-be murderer was handed over by Mr. Jones to the charge
of the Parish Constable, and was afterwards released. It should be
remembered that there were but few, if any, fixed pews in the Old
Church, only movable benches. Neither was the floor paved or boarded."


