GWELLA CLEFYD Y GALON, OR HEART DISEASE, A LOVE SICKNESS.

A writer in "Cymru Fu" an interesting reprint from "The Weekly Mail,"
says:--

It is a well-known fact that "clefyd y Galon," or love-sickness is a
very prevalent complaint in Wales, especially among young females who
have been jilted, or have failed to win the affection of the young
man whom they admire best. The lamented Talhaiarn knew all about it
when he penned the line in one of his love songs:--


    "Minau'n ceisio caru Gwen, a hithau'n caru Roli."


A cure of this disease has been for centuries, and still is, a secret
of great value in the Principality, and there are many old women,
and some young men, now living, who are making splendid profits out
of the secret they have in their possession. An old wag called "Ned
y Wain," who resided near Aberystwyth; Harries, Cwrtycadno; and a
shrewd old woman in the neighbourhood of Ystumtuen, Cardiganshire,
practised the "cure" as a part of a professional conjuring, and
many excellent but ridiculous stories are current anent the visits
of young females, especially the "Ladies of Borth," to the chambers
of the enchanters. The "secret" came into my possession thirty-eight
years ago in the following manner:--

When a young lad at home, I had the privilege of visiting a farm house,
the last on the borders of Cardiganshire, adjoining Montgomeryshire,
where resided a wealthy young widower now living. The landlady of
the adjoining farm on the other side of the River Llyfnwy, during my
stay, used to cross the river frequently to visit the young widower,
with whom she spent hours closeted in the parlour. The frequency of
her calls, and the great secrecy observed at her coming and going,
drew my attention, and provoked my curiosity, and I began to twit the
young widower, who was a local preacher, of something he could not
very well relish, and in order to clear himself of all suspicion,
he told me that the woman visited him only to cure Clefyd-y-galon;
and handed over to me the cherished secret, which I now divulge as a
relic of the dark days of Wales, and for the amusement of the readers
of "Cymru Fu."

The MS. was in Welsh, of which the appended is a translation:--

1st.--Ask the name of the person, and the surname, and the age;
and take a double threaded yarn and measure it with your naked
arm from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger three times,
naming the person, and saying the age, in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Then put a mark on the thread, and if
it is on the person the thread will shorten, but it not, the thread
will lengthen. For example, say thus--I am Joseph, thirty-six years
of age in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; and
measuring, and say it each time while measuring; and do not cut the
thread until you have measured three times. It is necessary that the
thread should be scoured white wool. Take care not to put the age of
the person more than it is. Then put it round the neck of the person,
and leave it there for three nights; then take it from the neck and
bury it under the ashes in the name of the Trinity. Put a knot on one
end of it after cutting it. It is necessary to look several times if
the person is recovering or not. Should the thread shorten above the
middle finger, there is but little hopes of his recovery; nevertheless,
many recover when it shortens the finger's length. It is necessary
to keep the whole affair as secret as you possibly can. Again, take
notice, it is necessary to measure three lengths from the elbow to
the tip of the middle finger; then put a mark on the spot, or let
anyone take hold of it; then begin to measure the same way again,
naming as said before until you have measured three times, and take
notice, as said before if the thread shortens.


