THE MEDICINE.

Six penny worth of gin, or quart of beer, four penny-worth of best
saffron; give them a boiling on a slow fire, and take them for seven
mornings, after putting red hot steel in to warm it.



TOUCHING; OR THE CURE OF THE DISEASE KNOWN AS "THE KING'S EVIL."

In the new and valuable History of Radnorshire (p. 321), published by
Davis and Co., Brecon, appeared the following transcript of a printed
paper, now in a decayed state, which was pasted on a board and placed
in a conspicuous part of the Church of Diserth, in that County:--

"At the Court of Whitehall, the 9th of January, 1683.

"Whereas by the Grace of God, the King and Queen of this Realm,
by and for many years past, have had the happiness by their sacred
touch, and invocation of the name of God, to cure those who are
afflicted with the disease called the King's Evil; and His Majesty
in no less measure than any of his royal predecessors, having had
success therein, and in his most gracious, and pious disposition,
being as ready and willing as any King or Queen of this realm ever
was in anything to relieve the distresses and necessities of his good
subjects; yet in his princely wisdom, foreseeing that in this (as in
all other things) order to be observed, and fit times are necessary
to be appointed for the performance of this great work of charity,
his Majesty was therefore this day pleased to declare in Council his
royal will and pleasure to be that (in regard heretofore the usual
times of presenting such persons for this purpose have been prefixed
by his royal predecessors) from thenceforth be from the Feast of All
Saints, commonly called All Hallowtide to Christmas until the first
of March, and then to cease till Passion Week, on account of the
temperature of the season, and in respect of contagion, which may
happen to his Majesty's Sacred person. And when his Majesty shall
at any time think fit to go, any progression, to appoint such other
times for healing as shall be convenient. And his Majesty doth order
and command that from the time of publishing this his Majesty's order,
none present themselves at his Majesty's Court to be healed of the said
disease, but only at, or within the times for that purpose appointed
as aforesaid. And His Majesty was further pleased to order that all
such as shall hereafter repair to the Court for this purpose, shall
bring with them certificates under the hands and seals of the ---- or
minister, and of both, or of one of the Churchwardens of the respective
parishes whereto they belong, and from whence they come, testifying
according to the truth, that they have not at any time before been
presented to the intent of being healed of that disease. And all
ministers and Churchwardens are ordered to be careful to examine
into the truth before they give certificates, and also to keep and
register the names of such persons, to whom such certificates they
shall from time to time give. And to the end that all His Majesty's
loving subjects may be informed of His Majesty's command, His Majesty
was pleased to direct that this order be published in all parish
churches, and then to be affixed to some conspicuous place there;
and that to that end a convenient number of copies be sent to the
Most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Lord Archbishop of York, who are to take care that the same be
distributed to all the parishes in their respective provinces."

The above proclamation was issued in the Reign of Charles II.


