THE HEALING CUP.

Until a few years ago it was usual for people who were ill, especially
those suffering from hemorrhage to send to Nanteos for the loan of
this healing cup, as it was supposed to possess healing power which
could only be called miraculous, and there are many instances of
cures believed to have been effected by taking food and medicine or
wine out of the cup. It is a great pity that this interesting relic
is now in an unshapely condition, having been considerably damaged
by some of the patients who were not content with drinking from it,
but tried to bite away parts of the cup itself.

It is quite possible that this holy relic was the chalice therein
our Lord consecrated the wine and water at the institution of the
Eucharist, and in which was said to be preserved some of the blood
which fell from the Saviour's wounds as he hung on the cross.

In an interesting little book written five years ago, by Miss
Ethelwyn M. Amery, B.A., entitled "Sought and Found," the writer,
after giving the story of the the Holy Grail, concludes. "Not far
from the sea-side town of Aberystwyth, in Mid-Wales, stands the
House of Nanteos, the country seat of the Powells. The family is an
ancient one; it was ancient in the days of the Reformation, and is
possessed of all the traditions of antiquity, including a phantom
coach, which foretells death. To this house came, one summer's day,
a party of holiday-makers from Aberystwyth--ordinary twentieth century
people, with all the most up-to-date ideas--and to them was shown
the house and its treasures. There was old armour in the hall, old
china in the gallery, a wonderful carved arch in the drawing-room,
and many other things which attract the sightseer, attracted one and
another of the party. But there were a few who had no eyes for these
things; to them the centre of interest was found in a small glass,
carefully covered with silk, which was brought out to the lawn from
its home in the library, so that all might more easily see it. Now
those who looked at this case wondered what this treasure could be
which was thus carefully guarded, and when the cover was withdrawn,
the astonishment of many more than equalled their previous curiosity,
for in this case was a fragment of wood, at first sight shapeless and
worm-eaten (and many saw no more than this), but those who looked
more closely saw that this worm-eaten fragment was shaped like a
wooden bowl about five inches high, of which one side was broken
nearly down to the foot, and the other part was roughly held together
by two rivets. Many having seen this were satisfied, and went away,
but some listened to what their hostess told them concerning the cup,
and this is the story she told:

"'Many years ago, when Henry VIII. was destroying the Monasteries, his
servants came into Wales, and hearing of an ancient Monastery among the
hills, where only seven old monks remained to guard their treasure,
he determined to destroy the Abbey and seize their goods. But the
monks were warned by friendly neighbours, and fled by night, bearing
their treasure with them. Their journey was long and dangerous for
such old men, but they reached the House of Nanteos in safety, and
deposited the treasure they had suffered so much to save. One by one
the old monks died, and at the point of death he entrusted the treasure
to the owner of the house that had sheltered them, until the Church
should once more claim its own. But the Church has not yet claimed it,
and it is that treasure of the monks which you now see.'

"And again some were satisfied and went away, only wondering that
the old monks risked their lives for so small a thing. But those
who remained heard further, that the monks had regarded this cup
as sacred. Many reasons were given for this: one was that it had
a Communion Chalice, another that it possessed miraculous power of
healing, but the true reason is told only to the few who press closely
for it, and it is thus:--

"Not for its healing properties alone was this cup treasured, not
because from it the Monks had received the Communion wine; the cup
was older than the Monastery--indeed, the Monastery had been built
to receive it; it had been handed down from Abbott to Abbott through
the ages, and in each age its secret was told to one or two, that
they might guard it the more carefully, for this cup is none other
than the one from which our Lord drank at the Last Supper--the cup so
eagerly sought for by King Arthur's knights; found and handled by many,
who, because of their blindness were unable to perceive the treasure
which was before them; seen and realized by the pure knight Galahad,
and then hidden from common touch and sight during the sinful days
which followed, but preserved carefully through them all, and powerful
even yet to give to those who will wait for it, a faint--alas! very
faint--glimpse of Galahad's vision, and to remind them that even yet
'The pure in heart shall see God.'"

Just as I am sending this to the press, Mrs. Powell of Nanteos,
showed me a letter which she had just received from a noble French
lady begging her to send to her in a letter, an handkerchief, or ever
a rag, which had been tied round this Healing Cup for 24 hours.


