ST. TEILO'S WELL.

This strong spring rises within a short distance of the ruined church
of Llandilo Llwydiarth, near Maenclochog, in Pembrokeshire, and close
by, there is a farm-house in which a skull, traditionally called
"Penglog Teilo," (Teilo's Skull) is kept, and has been kept from
time immemorial. This skull is used for drinking water out of from
St. Teilo's Well. In former times St. Teilo's Well had a wide-spread
reputation as a healing well, and the sick from all parts of South
Wales resorted to it; but it was considered absolutely necessary
to drink the water out of the skull, which had to be dipped in
the well, and filled with water, and handed to the patient by the
hereditary keeper. The present keeper of the relic is Mr. Melchior,
an intelligent farmer, who informed me that his ancestors had been
keepers of the skull from time immemorial. How the skull first came
there, Mr. Gibby, of Llangolman, gave the following tradition:--When
St. Teilo was dying he bade a female servant take his skull from
Llandilo, in Carmarthenshire, to Llandilo, in Pembrokeshire, and that
if this was done, the skull would be a blessing to coming generations
of men who would have their health restored by drinking water out of
it. According to another tradition which I have heard, the skull came
from Llandaff Cathedral, where St. Teilo was Bishop, though born in
the neighbourhood of Tenby. If we believe the old legend, the miracles
he worked in death were marvellous; for, "on the night of his decease,
there arose a great dispute between the clergy of the three Churches
each asserting its authority and privileges for obtaining his body;
but at length, attending to the advice of discreet men, they had
recourse to fasting and prayer, that Christ, the great judge, who is
the true authority, and privilege of holy persons, should declare by
some sign, to which of them he would be pleased to commit the body
of the saint. And in the morning a certain elder, looking towards
the place where the body was, spoke with a loud voice, saying,
"Our prayer, brethren, has been heard by the Lord, who deprives no
one of his reward; arise, and behold what things have been done by
Christ the meditator between God and man, that our dispute might be
settled; and as in the life so in the death of the holy confessor,
Teilo, miracles should be performed." For, lo! they saw there three
bodies, to which there was the same dimensions of body, the same
beauty of countenance; they had the lineaments of the whole frame,
without any difference. So peace being restored, each with their own
corpse returned homewards, and they buried the different bodies in
those several places with the greatest reverence."

St. Teilo died in the year 566, and people of the present day hardly
believe that the relic at Llandilo Llwydiarth is the real skull of
this saint, though the skull in question is a very old one, and only
the brain pan now remains. About five years ago an old man named John
Griffiths, living in the village of Maenclochog, informed me that he
well remembered the time when people came to St. Teilo's Well, from all
parts of the country, for the alleviation of their ailments, "and were
cured" said he, "by faith." The same old man also told me that when a
boy, he and other two boys who were suffering from the whooping cough,
were sent by their mothers early in the morning to drink water from
the well out of the skull. They did so and got rid of their coughs
entirely. I was told by another person in the neighbourhood, that
about seventy years ago, a gentleman from Glamorganshire, drove his
consumptive son in a carriage all the way to Pembrokeshire, to try this
healing fountain of St. Teilo, but arrived home in Swansea without
feeling any better. He had drunk the water from the well, but not
out of the skull. His father took the boy all the way to St. Teilo's
Well a second time, and now made him drink out of the skull, and was
completely cured of his complaint. When I was spending a few weeks at
Maenclochog, some years ago, in quest of information, I accompanied
Mr. Melchior to the well one day, and drank out of the skull. But,
unfortunately, I did not get rid of my cold, from which I was suffering
at the time, but, perhaps, my faith was not strong enough.


