CHAPTER XI.

FOLK-LORE OF FOUNTAINS, LAKES, AND CAVES.


HOLY WELLS.

There is much Folk-Lore in connection with wells, in Wales, and
an interesting volume might be written on the subject. Holy Wells
were once much frequented by devotees in search of health, omens, or
prognostications of coming events; and even at the present day some of
them are made use of as wishing wells by young men and young women, who
throw a bent or a crooked pin into the well, and wishing at the same
time. In the old times when "Gwyliau Mabsant," or Saints' Fetes, were
in vogue in Wales, wells were sometimes the scenes of great merriment,
both before and even after the Reformation. According to an old writer
they were much frequented in the time of Queen Elizabeth. The habit of
tying rags to the branches of a tree close to the well was well-known
once in several places. This was done by people who were suffering from
maladies. The rag was first dipped in the water, and the afflicted
part of the body bathed with it. Afterwards before going away from
the well the rag was tied to the branch of a tree near it. It is also
worth mentioning that this ceremony is in vogue in Eastern Countries
as well, such as Arabia and Persia. As far as Wales is concerned, some
of the wells frequented in times past, possessed medicinal properties;
but it must be admitted that some of the superstitious ceremonies which
were performed at them, must have come down from pre-Christian times;
and it seems evident that water was once an object of worship, or at
least of veneration, and that offerings were made either to the water
itself, or more probably to the tutelary god of the fountain. This
was the opinion of the late Rev. Elias Owen, F.S.A., who had made a
special study of the subject all his life-time. That the inhabitants
of Great Britain were, in ancient times, given to the adoration of
fountains, is evident from the fact that in 960, King Edgar commanded
by Canon law "That every priest industriously advance Christianity
and extinguish heathenism and forbid the 'Worship of Fountains,
and necromancy and auguries."" But finding the worship of fountains
too strong to put down at once, the priest effected a compromise, by
transferring veneration from the tutelary god by dedicating the well
to a saint, and building a church on the spot, and baptised his flock
in the well; nevertheless many pagan customs of well worship lingered
on from generation to generation. At the present day in some places,
we find a village pump situated at the corner of the Churchyard,
which is not at all a good thing from a sanitary point of view. But
we must bear in mind that the well was there before the Churchyard,
and that in most of such cases the site of the Church had been fixed
upon because of the virtue and attractions  of the well.


