RIVER LEGENDS.


                           "Hafren ag Wy, hyfryd eu gwedd
                            A Rheidol fawr ei hanrhydedd."

                            (How beautiful are the Severn and Wye
                            And Rheidol is held in honour they say.)


The Severn, the Wye, and the Rheidol rise on Plinlimon Mountain. These
rivers, which are called three sisters, agreed to make a visit to
the sea in the morning. Severn rose up very early, and took compass
through Shropshire, Worcestershire, and Gloucestershire. Wye rose
later and took her journey through the counties of Radnorshire and
Hereford, falling in with her sister near Chepstow, and went hand in
hand to the ocean. Rheidol indulged in her dreams and lay so late that
she was forced to take the nearest road to Aberystwyth. According to
another version of this legend five sister fountains are mentioned,
namely, Wye, Severn, Rheidol, Llyfnant and the Dulas.

There is another interesting old legend having close connection with
the Severn, the following version of which is given by Milton in his
History of Britain:--"After this Brutus in a chosen place, built Troja
Nova, changed in time to Trimovantum, now London; and began to enact
laws (Heli being then High Priest in Judea); and having governed
the whole isle twenty-four years died, and was buried in his new
Troy. Three sons--Locrine, Albanact, and Camber--divided the land
by consent. Locrine had the middle part, Loegria; Camber possessed
Cambria or Wales; Albanact, Albania, now Scotland. But he in the end,
by Humber, King of the Hums, who, with a fleet, invaded that land,
was slain in fight, and his people driven back into Loegria. Locrine
and his brother go out against Humber; who now marching onward was by
these defeated, and in a river drowned, which to this day retains his
name. Among the spoils of his camp and navy were found certain maids,
and Estrilidis, above the rest, passing fair, the daughter of a King
in Germany, from whence Humber, as he went wasting the sea-coast,
had led her captive; whom Locrine, though before, contracted to
the daughter of Corineus, resolves to marry. But being forced and
threatened by Corineus, whose authority and power he feared, Gwendolen,
the daughter, he yields to marry, but in secret loves the other; and
ofttimes retiring as to some sacrifice, through vaults and passages
made underground, and seven years thus enjoying her, had by her a
daughter equally fair, whose name was Sabra. But when once his fear
was off by the death of Corineus, not content with secret enjoyment,
divorcing Gwendolen, he makes Estrilidis his queen. Gwendolen, all, in
rage, departs into Cornwall; where Pladan, the son she had by Locrine,
was hitherto brought up by Corineus, his grandfather; and gathering
an army of her father's friends, and subjects, gives battle to her
husband by the river Sture, wherein Locrine, shot with an arrow, ends
his life. But not so ends the fury of Gwendolen, for Estrilidis and
her daughter Sabra she throws into a river, and, to have a monument
of revenge proclaims that the stream be thenceforth called after the
damsel's name, which by length of time is changed now to Sabrina or
Severn." The Poet in his "Mask of Comus" makes the nymph Sabrina "that
with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream" the goddess of the
river, but still retaining her maiden gentleness, and the shepherds,
at their festivals, "Carol her goodness loud in their rustic lays,
and throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream of pansies, pink,
and gaudy daffodils. And, as the old swain said, she can unlock the
clasping charm, and thaw the number spell, if she be right invoked
in warbling song; for maidenhood she loves, and will be swift to aid
a virgin, such as was herself, in hard-besetting need." In the year
1634 when this "Comus" was presented at Ludlow Castle before the Lord
President of Wales, the President's own daughter, Lady Alice Egerton,
when only a little girl, acted in it; and it is an interesting fact
that this same Lady Alice, some years afterwards, became the wife of
the Earl of Carbery, Golden Grove, Carmarthenshire, who entertained
Jeremy Taylor during the time of the Commonwealth.


