LLYN EIDDWEN, LLYN FANOD, AND LLYN FARCH.

These are a group of lakes in which the river Aeron, in Cardiganshire,
rises. There is an old story that wild cattle used to come out of
Eiddwen, and rush back when disturbed. Mr. David Rees, Glynwern,
Llanilar, informed me that according to an old prophecy attributed
to Merlin, when Llyn Eiddwen dries up the town of Carmarthen will
sink! There is also a story about Llyn Farch that, once upon a time, a
most wonderful animal came out of its waters, and was shot by a farmer.



SAVADDAN LAKE (BRECONSHIRE).

This celebrated lake which is known by several names, such as
Llangorse Lake, Lake of Brycheiniog, etc., occupies a spot where,
according to ancient tradition, once stood a large city, which was
swallowed up by an earthquake. Camden once thought that the supposed
city was the ancient Loventium of the Romans; but Loventium stood,
in all probability, in the parish of Llanddewi Brefi, Cardiganshire.

This lake was once celebrated for its miracles, and Giraldus Cambrensis
seven hundred years ago, says:--"In the reign of King Henry I.,
Gruffydh, son of Rhys ap Theodor, held under the King, one comot,
namely, the fourth part of the cantred of Caoc, in the Cantref Mawr,
which, in title and dignity, was esteemed by the Welsh, equal to the
southern part of Wales, called Deheubarth, that is, the right-hand
side of Wales. When Gruffydh, on his return from the King's Court,
passed near this lake, which at that cold season of the year was
covered with waterfowl of various sorts, being accompanied by Milo,
Earl of Hereford, and Lord of Brecheinioc, and Payn Fitz-John, Lord of
Ewyas, who were at that time secretaries and privy counsellors of the
King; Earl Milo, wishing to draw forth from Gruffydh some discourse
concerning his innate nobility, rather jocularly than seriously thus
addressed him: 'It is an ancient saying in Wales, that if the natural
prince of the country, coming to this lake, shall order the birds to
sing, they will immediately obey him.' To which Gruffydh, richer in
mind than in gold (for though his inheritance was diminished, his
ambition and dignity still remained), answered, 'Do you therefore,
who now hold the dominion of this land, first give the command'; but
he and Payn having in vain commanded, and Gruffydh, perceiving that it
was necessary for him to do so in his turn, dismounted from his horse,
and falling on his knees towards the East, as if he had been about
to engage in battle, prostrate on the ground, with his eyes and hands
uplifted to Heaven, poured forth devout prayers to the Lord: at length,
rising up, and signing his face and forehead with the figure of the
cross, he thus openly spake: 'Almighty God, and Lord Jesus Christ,
who knowest all things, declare here this day Thy power. If Thou hast
caused me to descend lineally from the natural princes of Wales,
I command these birds in Thy name to declare it;' and immediately
the birds, beating the water with their wings, began to cry aloud,
and proclaim him. The spectators were astonished and confounded; and
Earl Milo hastily returning with Payn Fitz-John to Court, related
this singular occurrence to the King, who is said to have replied,
'By the death of Christ (an oath he was accustomed to use), it is
not a matter of so much wonder; for although by our great authority
we commit acts of violence and wrong against these people yet they
are known to be the rightful inheritors of this land.'"


