CHAPTER XII.

LOCAL TRADITIONS, Etc.


LLANDDEWI BREFI.

This parish is celebrated for its legendary lore; and no wonder for
it is a spot of great historic interest.

There is a tradition current in the neighbourhood to the effect that
it was originally intended to build the Church of Llanddewi Brefi in a
field on Godregarth farm, and that the work was actually commenced on
that spot, but the attempt to build there was constantly frustrated,
for that which was set up during the day was pulled down in the night
by a Spirit, and all the material removed or carried to the spot where
the Parish Church now stands. The field pointed out by tradition is
about a mile away from the village, and yew trees are still to be
seen there.

According to another most ancient tradition, when the Church was
in process of construction, two oxen known as the "Ychain Bannog"
were employed to draw the stone required for the building. The load
was so heavy that one of the two oxen died in the attempt to drag
it forward; but before falling down dead he bellowed nine times,
and so powerful was the echo that the hill, which before presented
itself as an obstacle, divided or split in two. The other ox alone
was then able to bring the load unassisted to the site of the Church.


   "Llanddewi Brefi fraith,
    Lle brefodd yr ych naw gwaith,
    Nos hollti craig y Foelallt."

    (Llanddewi Brefi the spotted,
    Where the ox bellowed nine times,
    Till Foelallt rock split in two.)


According to another version of the story, it was the ox which survived
was the one that bellowed, and not the one that died. According to
another story given in Meyrick's History of Cardiganshire, these
two Bannog Oxen were on one occasion used to draw "away a monstrous
beaver dead"; but this is only a version of a legend which is to be
found in several parts of Wales, and is founded on the older story
of Hu Gadarn, or Hu the Mighty, who, with his Bannog Oxen, drew to
land the avanc out of Llyn Llion, so that the lake burst out no more
to deluge the earth. See "Legend of Llyn y ddau Ychain" in Folk-Lore
of North Wales, by the late Rev. E. Owen, page 132.

The two Ychain Bannog of Llanddewi were sometimes called "dau ychain
Dewi" (St. David's two oxen). In a poem written in the Twelfth Century,
the Welsh Bard Gwynfardd Brycheiniog alludes to the old tradition
as follows:--


   "Dau ychan Dewi, deu odidawe,
    Dodyssant eu gwar dan garr kynawe,
    Dau ychen Dewi ardderchawe oeddynt."


There used to be preserved at Llanddewi Church a remarkable fragment
of a horn called "Madcorn yr Ych Bannog," that is, the core of the
Bannog Ox's Morn, which, according to tradition, had been kept there
as a valuable relic ever since the time of St. David. This horn is
now at Llidiardau, Llanilar, kept privately. It has been pronounced
by Professor Boyd Dawkins to have belonged to "the great urns (Bos
Primigenius) that Charlemagne hunted in the forest of Aachen, and
the Monks of St. Galle ate on their feast days."

When St. David was preaching at Llanddewi at the great Synod, in
the year 519, it is said that the ground on which he stood rose up
and formed a hillock under his feet. Cressy recounts the miracle in
the following words:--"When all the fathers assembled enjoined David
to preach, he commanded a child which attended him, and had lately
been restored to life by him, to spread a napkin under his feet; and,
standing upon it, he began to expound the Gospel and the law to the
auditory. All the while that this oration continued, a snow-white
dove, descending from Heaven, sate upon his shoulders; and, moreover,
the earth, on which he stood raised itself under him till it became
a hill, from whence his voice, like a trumpet, was clearly heard and
understood by all, both near and far off, on the top of which hill
a church was afterwards built, and remains to this day."

The people of Llanddewi Brefi told me that there is another tradition
still extant in the neighbourhood, which says that as St. David
was preaching on this great occasion, a nightingale appeared on the
spot, and sang. The music of the bird was so sweet, that the people
listened to the nightingale's song, instead of continuing to give
their attention to the sermon. Seeing this, the Holy Saint David
rebuked the congregation, and informed them that the nightingale
should never again sing in the neighbourhood; and from that day
till now the bird has never been heard there. According to the
great historian George Owen, there is a different version of this
story in Pembrokeshire. "St. David, being seriouse occupied in the
night tyme in his divine orizons, was so troubled with the sweete
tuninges of the nightingales, as that he could not fasten his minde
upon heavenlie cogitacions, as at other tymes, being letted (hindered)
by the melodie of the bird, praied unto the Almightie, that from that
tyme forward there might never a nightingale sing within his Dioces,
and this saieth our women (old wives' fables), was the cause of
confininge of the bird out of this country."

At Llanio Isaf, in the parish of Llanddewi Brefi are the remains
of Loventium, which was a large Roman city. About half a mile from
Gogoyan, in the same parish, was once a holy well called Ffynon Ddewi,
or St. David's Well, the water of which, according to tradition,
flowed up miraculously when St. David restored to life the son of a
widow. The well has now been closed up, and a house stands on the
spot. There is another "Ffynon Ddewi," on the road-side between
Aberaeron and Cardigan.



CAIO (CARMARTHENSHIRE).

In the parish of Caio, there is a gold mine which in ancient times
was worked by the Romans. It is on the estate of Dolaucothy, and the
spot is known as the "Ogofau," or caves, and part of it is a height,
hardly a mountain, that has been scooped out like a volcanic crater by
the Romans during their occupation. In this hollow or basin it is said
that the five saints named Ceitho, Gwyn, Gwynno, Gwynnoro, and Celynin,
who flourished in the sixth century, had retired in a thunderstorm
for shelter. They had penetrated into the mine and had lost their
way, and taking a stone for a bolster had laid their heads on it and
fallen asleep. And there they would remain in peaceful slumber till the
return of King Arthur, or till a more godly bishop than has hitherto
been should occupy the throne of St. David. When that happens, Merlin
himself is to be disenchanted and restore to liberty the dormant
saints. An inquisitive woman named Gweno, who, led by the devil,
sought to spy on the saintly brotherhood in their long sleep, was
punished by losing her way in the passage of the mine. She, likewise,
remained in an undying condition, but was suffered to emerge in storm
and rain, and in the night, when her vaporous form might be seen about
the old Ogofau, and her sobs and moans were heard and frightened many.

Mr. F. S. Price, in his interesting "History of Caio," says that
another legend is that one of these saints appears to have a special
commemoration, but under a female appelative in "Ffynon" and "Clochdy
Gwenno," the latter an isolated rock standing up in the midst of the
great gold excavations, and marking their depth in that particular
place. The well had, in good old times, a high reputation for healing
virtues, and that "on an unfortunate day, Gweno was induced to
explore the recesses of the cavern beyond a frowning rock, which had
always been the prescribed limit to the progress of the bathers. She
passed beneath it and was no more seen. She had been seized by some
superhuman power, as a warning to others not to invade those mysterious
'penetralia,' and still on stormy nights, when the moon is full, the
spirit of Gweno is seen to hover over the crag like a wreath of mist."


