CRUG MAWR.

The Rev. Peter Roberts, in his "Cambrian Popular Antiquities," says
that Crug Mawr, or Pentychryd Mawr, is a lofty hill in Cardiganshire,
situated in the Vale of Aeron, mentioned in Giraldus, where he says,
"there is an open grave, which fits the length of any man lying in it,
short or long." Hence arose the ancient tradition, that a powerful
giant, kept his post on this hill, and was endowed with the genius of
the Aeron Vale. He had a lofty palace erected on the hill, and used
occasionally to invite the neighbouring giants to a trial of strength
on the top of it. At one of these meetings coits were proposed and
introduced, and, after great efforts, the inhabitant of the spot won
the day, by throwing his coit clear into the Irish shore, which ever
after gave him the superiority over all other giants in Ceredigion,
or the land of Ceredig.

Gwynionydd in the First Volume of the "Brython," 1859, mentions two
places known as "Crug Mawr," one near Cardigan, and the other in the
Vale of Aeron.

Near the road leading from Newcastle Emlyn to Lampeter, is "Crug
Balog," where a warrior or giant of the name of Balog was buried.



CANTREF Y GWAELOD; OR THE LOST LOWLAND.


                           "Ochenaid Gwyddno Garanhir,
                            Pan droes y don dros ei dir."

                            (The sigh of Gwyddno Garanhir,
                            When the waives swept over his land.)


There is a well-known tradition in Cardiganshire, and indeed all over
Wales, that what is known to-day as Cardigan Bay was once dry land. The
country was known as Cantref y Gwaelod, or The Lowland Hundred. It
had sixteen cities, and in the beginning of the sixth century the
district was governed by a king named Gwyddno Garanhir. As the land
was below sea-level, dykes had been built to check the encroachments
of the sea. One day, however, Saethennyn Feddw, that is, Saethennyn
the Drunkard, son of the King of South Wales, opened the sluices,
and the sea flowed in, but the people fled to the uplands.

One of the ancient Welsh Triads commemorates the inundation as
follows:--

"The three abandoned drunkards of the Isle of Britain were, first,
drunken Geraint, King of Siluria, who in the paroxysm of a fit of
intoxication set fire to the standing corn; the conflagration in
consequence of which rash act spread so violently, that all the corn
of the country, to an immense distance, was totally consumed, and a
destructive famine ensued."

"The second was Vortigern, surnamed the wry-mouthed, who when
intoxicated gave Horsa, the Saxon chief, the Isle of Thanet, for
permission to have an illicit connection with his daughter Rowena;
and further promised, that her son, the fruit of that amour, should
succeed to the Crown of England; which proved productive of treachery,
and a sanguinary massacre of a prodigious number of the chieftains
of the Cambrian race.

"The third was drunken Seithinyn, the son of Seithyn Saidi, King
of Dimetia; who when in a state of intoxication suffered the sea
to overflow Cantref y Gwaelod, where lands and habitations the most
beautiful in all Wales, excepting only Caerleon or Usk, to the number
of sixteen cities and towns, were in a short period inundated and
ruined. The lowland hundred was the property of Gwyddno, surnamed
longshanks, King of Ceredigion (Cardiganshire). This event happened
in the reign of Emrys Wledig. The inhabitants who escaped from that
inundation landed in Ardudwy, and ascended the mountains of Snowdon,
which had never been inhabited before that period."

There is a poem on this inundation in the ancient Welsh book "Llyvr
Du Caerfyrddin" (Black Book of Carmarthen).

Near Wallog, a few miles to the North of Aberystwyth, a causeway
called Sarn Cynfelyn, extends several miles into the sea. According
to local tradition this is supposed to have been a main road leading
into the submerged country, and it is said that there was a royal
palace in this part. Other places which traditions associate with the
Lowland Hundred are Sarn Cadwgan and Sarn Ddewi, further South, near
Aberayron, and Sarn Badrig, in North Wales. So much has been written
on this subject, both in prose and verse, that it it not necessary to
dwell further on it here. But it is of interest to add that there is a
tradition, which is still extant that between Borth, in Cardiganshire,
and Aberdovey, in Merionethshire, there once stood a town at a spot
which is now covered by water. There is also a well-known story of
the chimes of bells being heard at the bottom of the sea.

Dwellers near Ramsey Sound, in Pembrokeshire, also hear the chimes
of bells in the sea, and this reminds us of the Story of Grallon,
in Brittany, who reigns beneath the waves.


