MAESYFELIN.

The most popular tradition associated with Lampeter is that known
as the "Curse of Maesyfelin." Maesyfelin was a stately mansion
on the banks of the river Dulas, on the east side of the town of
Lampeter. It was once a place of consequence, and an ancient family
of Lloyds lived there. About the beginning of the 17th Century the
famous Vicar Pritchard of Llandovery, author of "Canwyll y Cymry"
had a son named Samuel. Tradition has it that this young Samuel
was an intimate friend of Sir Francis Lloyd, Knight of Maesyfelin,
who was a wicked man. At last, so the story goes, the two quarrelled
over some love affair, and young Samuel was stifled to death between
two feather beds. The body, tied in a sack and placed on horse-back,
was conveyed over the mountain in the depth of night and thrown into
the river Towy in Carmarthenshire. When the body of his lamented son
was discovered in the river, the broken-hearted father pronounced a
curse on Maesyfelin in the following words:--


   "Melldith Duw ar Maesyfelin--
    Ar bob carreg, ar bob gwreiddyn--
    Am daflu blodau tref Llan'ddyfri
    Ar ei ben i Dywi i foddi."

    (The curse of God on Maesyfelin!
    On every stone, and root therein,
    For throwing the flower of Llandovery town
    To Towy's water, there to drown.)


People believe to this day that the judgment of God fell on
the family and mansion of Maesyfelin. The palace delapsed and no
longer exists. Materials from its ruins were carried away to repair
Ffynonbedr, another mansion in the neighbourhood; but that place is
also in ruin now, so that it is believed that the curse of Maesyfelin
followed the material to Ffynonbedr.



TENBY (PEMBROKESHIRE).

In former times Tenby was so celebrated for its fishery and it was
known as Dinbych-y-Pysgod, that is Tenby-of-the-Fish. There is a
tradition in the neighbourhood of some extraordinary bank or rock,
at sea, called "Will's Mark," on which codfish in great abundance
were formerly taken. The spot is no longer to be found, and the loss
is said to have been occasioned as a curse which the inhabitants of
the town brought upon themselves by their barbarous usage of a deaf
and dumb man, who had come into the town begging.



CWM KERWYN (PEMBROKESHIRE).

In this locality is a huge stone or rock, which, according to
tradition, was thrown there by King Arthur of old; and somewhere in
the same neighbourhood is "Bedd Arthur," Arthur's Grave.



LLANSTEPHAN CASTLE (CARMARTHENSHIRE).

It is popularly supposed that there is an underground passage from
this old Castle to the mansion, known as Plas Llanstephan. Tradition
has it that many an attempt was made in former times to go through,
but always in vain, as a spirit extinguished the candles of all who
entered the passage after proceeding a certain distance.



CWMYREGLWYS (PEMBROKESHIRE).

According to Pentrevor, in "The Pembroke County Guardian," March,
1903, a "Fairies' Town" has been seen in the sea occasionally in
this neighbourhood. He also adds that there are on the extreme
point of Dinas Head, some steps in the rock called "The Devil's
Footprints." There are also "Devil's Footprints" in a rock, to be
seen in Cardiganshire, between Llanwenog and Llanarth.



MESUR Y DORTH (MEASURE OF THE LOAF).

Between St. David's and Fishguard is an object not unlike a milestone,
upon which is rudely traced a cross within a circle: the irregular
disc being about a foot in diameter. This is known as "Mesur y Dorth,"
(Measure of the Loaf); and the tradition is, that St. David caused
these figures to be made in order to regulate the size of the loaf
of bread in times of scarcity.


