ABERGWILI.

Near the Bishop of St. David's Palace, Abergwili, is a pool in the
river Towy, called "Pwll y Coach" (the Coach's Pool). The tradition is
that in the old Coaching Days the "Great Coach" fell into this pool,
and was never seen again.



CAE POETH (HOT FIELD).

In the parish of Llanon, Carmarthenshire, is a field called "Cae
Poeth." Tradition says that images which were in the Church before
the Reformation were burnt at this spot.



CRAIG GWRTHEYRN (VORTIGERN'S ROCK).

Craig Gwrtheyrn is in the neighbourhood of Pencader, in
Carmarthenshire. According to an old legend, the disreputable old
British King Vortigern, built a castle here in the fifth century;
but he and his castle were destroyed by fire from heaven. There is
also a story that Owen Glyndwr sleeps in a cave here.



BRYNBERIAN (PEMBROKESHIRE).

Near Brynberian, in North Pembrokeshire, there is a grave known as
"Bedd yr Afanc," or the Avanc's Grave. According to an old tradition in
the neighbourhood, this Avanc was a most dangerous beast or monster,
which at last, after much trouble, was caught in a pool in the river,
and buried with pomp and religious rites on a spot which still bears
the name "Bedd yr Afanc."



LLANON (CARDIGANSHIRE).

Non was the mother of St. David. The Vicar, Mr. Lewis, informed me
that there is a tradition in the neighbourhood that the Patron Saint
was born here, and owned much land here, including all the flats
known as Morfa Esgob--The Bishop's March. It is said that St. David
divided the land into small portions which he gave to the fishermen
of the place. There was a stone on the exterior wall of the ruins
of St. Non's Chapel, on which was carved the face of a woman with a
child in her arms, traditionally reputed to be that of Non and her
child David. There is also a tradition that the Saint was educated
at Henfynyw. See more about this in Mr. Eyre Evans' interesting book
on the Antiquities of Cardiganshire.

Some three miles from Llanon, says Mr. Horsfall-Turner in his
"Wanderings in Cardiganshire," legends have been busy with a huge
stone pillar which marks, perhaps the grave of some long-forgotten
hero. "During the building of Devil's Bridge, we are told, his Satanic
majesty wished to employ this monolith and carried it away, his finger
marks may still be seen--leaving another impression. He sat so long
and thought so deeply, that at the crowing of the cock, he was startled
and vanished so rapidly that the stone was so completely forgotten."



TYNYCASTELL (DEVIL'S BRIDGE).

According to the Rev. John Griffith, Llangynwyd, there is a version
of the well-known legend of Arthur or Owen Lawgoch and the Sleeping
Warriors attached to this place; but as I have already given a version
of this story in connection with Owen Lawgoch's Cave, near Llandebie,
I shall not repeat it here. King Arthur figures rather prominently
in North Cardiganshire. Between Devil's Bridge and Llanafan is a farm
belonging to the Earl of Lisburne called "Maen Arthur"--Arthur's Stone;
and in the parish of Llanbadarn-fawr there is a "Llys Arthur"--Arthur's
Court, a legendary residence of the renowned King.



BEDD TALIESIN (TALIESIN'S GRAVE).

About eight miles north of Aberystwyth is an ancient grave known as
Bedd Taliesin. According to a local tradition, Taliesin, Chief Bard
of the Island of Britain was buried on this spot. The grave, which
is composed of stones, is in the centre of a large heap of earth or
mound surrounded by stone circles, and some generations ago bones,
and even a human skull, were found in it, which probably were the
remains of the great ancient poet. There is a superstition respecting
Bedd Taliesin that should anyone sleep in it for one night, he would
the next day become either a poet or an idiot. There is a similar
popular belief in connection with Cader Idris, in Merionethshire,
where an eminent bard once tried the experiment. Taliesin's Grave
is in the Parish of Llanfihangel genau'r Glyn, and in the adjoining
parish of Llancynfelin there is a village bearing the name of Taliesin;
and, according to the "Mabinogion," the great poet was born somewhere
between the Dyvi and Aberystwyth. The people of North Cardiganshire
believe to this day that Taliesin was both born and buried in their
district. The origin of his birth, which was supposed to be very
miraculous, and other legends which cling to the memory of this great
man are to be found in the Mabinogion.



CRUGIAU'R LADIS (CARMARTHENSHIRE).

On the mountain above the village of Caio, there are two peculiar
heaps of stone known as Crugiau'r Ladis, concerning which there is the
following curious tradition:--Two ladies from London were exiled from
their homes, and lived in this district. The change of town life to
country was so great, that they set to work and gathered heaps of
stone together to build a Babel heavenward, from the top of which
they could see London from the land of exile.

I heard a story when a boy that Derry Ormond tower, near Lampeter,
was also built in order to see London.


