ABERMARLAIS.

At the entrance gate of Abermarlais Park there is an interesting stone,
near which, according to a tradition related to me by Mrs. De Rutzen,
the Welsh Princes held a council of war. I was also informed by people
in the neighbourhood that the spot was once haunted by the ghost of
a lady in white.



OYSTERMOUTH CASTLE (GOWER).

It is said that in an underground dungeon of Oystermouth Castle is,
or there was, a large pillar known as "The Wishing Post," around which
young men and young women, when wishing for a lover or sweetheart,
were in the habit of walking nine times, and at the same time sticking
a pin in the pillar and looking on the wall, when they were supposed
to see "a lady in white."



OXWITCH (GOWER).

Near the Bone Caves is a cromlech known as Arthur's Stone. According
to tradition, St. David split it with a sword in proof that it was
not sacred.



CAE HALOG (NORTH CARDIGANSHIRE).

"Cae Halog," at Llanbadarn-fawr means "Desecrated Field." The tradition
in the neighbourhood is, that in former times people met together at
this spot to indulge in games and contests on Sundays, thus breaking
the Sabbath.



MOUNT AND VERWICK (CARDIGAN).

It was customary in former times for the people of this district to
meet together on the First Sunday after New Year's Day, called by them
"Sul Coch" (Red Sunday), when wrestling, football, etc., took place,
to commemorate a victory over the Flemings.

In the neighbouring parish of Llangoedmore, is St. Cynllo's Cave,
where, according to ancient tradition, the holy Saint prayed, and
where marks of his knees are to be seen in the rocks.



MAENCLOCHOG (PEMBROKESHIRE).

It is said that this parish received its name from a stone which
sounded like a bell. An old man named John Griffiths, informed me
that he remembered this stone, which was a very large one, and that
people broke it up in order to see what caused it to sound.



HIGHMEAD (CARDIGANSHIRE).

There are old traditions that an ancient Welsh King, named Pryderi
Ap Pwyll, had a palace here, somewhere on the river side, on a spot
known according to the Mabinogion, as "Rhuddlan Teivi." The present
mansion is the country residence of Colonel Davies-Evans, the worthy
Lord Lieutenant of Cardiganshire, who informed me that Sir John Rhys,
Oxford, has been trying to discover traces of Pryderi's palace.

I dealt with this subject in a paper which I read at Highmead, June,
1910, before the Cardiganshire Antiquarian Society, and which is to
be published in the Transactions of that Society. I may also add that
the Lord Lieutenant and Mrs. Davies-Evans are among my best friends
in South Wales, and I have made much use of their valuable library.



GOGERDDAN (NEAR ABERYSTWYTH).

The late John Jones, Bristol House, Talybont, informed me six years
ago, that there is a tradition in the neighbourhood that Henry
VII. called at Gogerddan when on his way through Cardiganshire to
Bosworth Field. Henry had been entertained at Wern Newydd and Llwyn
Dafydd in the south of the county. Gogerddan is the ancient residence
of the genial baronet, Sir Edward Webley-Parry-Pryse.



LLANGYNLLO (CARDIGANSHIRE).

There is a tradition in this parish, that in ancient times, the
Romans put to death a young woman in the neighbourhood of Gernos,
and that her spirit haunted the spot for generations. At first,
she appeared as a cat, and afterwards as a "White lady."

There is a tradition that a son of Howell Dda, King of Wales, lived
in the neighbouring district of Dyffryn Cerri.



LLANGWYRYFON (CHURCH OF THE VIRGINS).

Tradition says that this parish received is name from eleven thousand
Welsh virgins, who were massacred by barbarians on the coast of
Germany. The virgins were on their way to Brittany.



PENBRYN (CARDIGANSHIRE).

According to my friend, the Rev. Prys Williams (Brythonydd), there
is a farm in this parish called "Perth Geraint"; and it is probable
that Geraint, one of King Arthur's knights was buried somewhere in
this neighbourhood, as tradition locates in the parish of Penbryn,
the "Battle of Llongborth," at which Geraint was killed. This is
the Geraint who figures in the Mabinogion, and in Tennyson, as the
knight who married the young Lady Enid, who is described as "comely
and graceful."

There is a stone near Troed-y-Rhiw, which, according to tradition,
was an ejected pebble from the clog of a giant who lived in the
district in ancient times.



CILGERRAN (PEMBROKESHIRE).

It is said that the spot where the remains of the Castle now stand,
was known in ancient times as "Dyngeraint," so named from Geraint, one
of King Arthur's Knights. This is the Geraint I have just mentioned
above in connection with the traditions of Penbryn, Cardiganshire, a
parish which is only about seven miles distance from Cilgerran. Arthur
and his Knights figure prominently in the traditions of Pembrokeshire,
and there is a legend of a battle fought by Arthur's sons in the
neighbourhood of Precelly.



GORSYGEDOL (MERIONETHSHIRE).

Lady Enid Vaughan, daughter of Countess Lisburne, and sister of the
young Earl of Lisburne, informed me that there is a tradition in
the neighbourhood of Harlech that Charles I. during the Civil War,
was at one time hiding at Gorsygedol, and that the bedstead in which
he slept is still to be seen there. Near the same old mansion is a
large stone known as "Coeten Arthur"--Arthur's coit.


