NICK-NAMES, OLD AND POPULAR SAYINGS.


    "There is one-half of him in Penboyr."


"Angylion Ceinewydd, Gwartheg Llanarth, Hwrddod Cilcennin." (New
Quay's angels, Llanarth's cows, Cilcennin's rams.)


   "Gwyr Llanddeusant, capan crwyn,
    Lladron defaid, mamau'r wyn."

    (Llanddeusant men, skin caps,
    Sheep stealers, lambs's mothers.)

   "Moch Sir Benfro."
    (Pembrokeshire pigs.)


It is probable that Pembrokeshire was the particular part of Britain
into which pigs were first introduced. In the Mabinogion, Gwydion tells
Math, son of Mathonwy, Lord of North Wales, that Pryderi, Lord of the
South, had some beasts called pigs. Pryderi, though he had a palace
at Rhuddlan Teivi, in Cardiganshire, was a Pembrokeshire Prince, and
it would seem that his chief palace was still at Narberth, and that
he introduced some of his pigs from Pembrokeshire into Cardiganshire.


   "Esmwyth yw Cwsg cawl Erfin."
    (Easily sleeps turnip broth.)


In the "Cambrian Notes and Queries," reprinted from the "Weekly mail,"
March, 1902, I.H.A. says: "There were two families living in two small
cottages somewhere in a secluded spot on one of the slopes of the Black
Mountain, Carmarthenshire, both in very straitened circumstances. The
paterfamilias' names were John and David. John found a way out of
the difficulty of rearing a family upon the salary earned by farm
labourers in those days by stealing a sheep now and then from the
mountain flocks. His family very often had mutton broth and plenty of
meat for supper while David's family had to sup upon a piece of coarse
bread and turnip broth. Upon a certain night David had enjoyed his
usual repast and gone to bed. Mrs. David had gone to the "next door" to
view the feast, when suddenly two constables of the old fashion, made
their appearance to demand the body of friend John, his depredations
having been found out. Mrs. David was frightened and ran into her
own house. She then called her husband. 'David! David! Come down at
once; they are going to take John of the next door to prison.' 'No,'
says David, 'I will sleep on'--


   "Esmwyth y Cwsg cawl erfin."
    (Easily sleeps turnip broth.)


The above saying is well-known all over Wales, but in the northern
part of the Principality people say, "Esmwyth y cwsg potes faip." What
is known as "Cawl erfin" in South Wales, is known in North Wales as
"potes faip."

Another similar saying which I have heard many a time is "Esmwyth
cwsg cawl dwr"--easily sleeps water broth.

Mr. John Davies, of the National Library of Wales, Aberystwyth, in the
"Cambrian Notes and Queries," says: "'Esmwyth cwsg cawl dwr' is an old
saying in Cardiganshire, especially in the parish of Llandyssul. About
the year 1830 my grandfather was constable of the parish, 'Lladron
Defaid' (sheep stealers) were very popular at that time; so old Siams
Isaac, of Pantrhedynen, was called from his bed one winter night to
take a prisoner to Cardigan Gaol, who was caught red-handed in the
act of killing the sheep in his house. On the road going from Horeb
to Newcastle Emlyn the constable and prisoner went into a public
house and called for a pint of beer and bread and cheese each. After
resuming their journey for about a hundred yards, the landlady of the
public house called after them that the man had stolen a knife from
the house. A search was made, and the knife was found in the pocket
of the 'Lleidr Defaid.' After the usual compliment of a few rounds of
old-fashioned boxing, he was taken safely to a place of correction,
and never returned to Tregroes. So the old woman who happened to live
next door always said to John, her husband, 'Esmwyth cwsg cawl dwr
John bach,' (water broth, easy sleep, John dear).



"CYNGHOR GWRAIG HEB EI OFYN."

(A Woman's advice without asking for it).

When King Henry VII. (then Earl of Richmond) was on his way through
Wales to Bosworth Field, he consulted Dafydd Llwyd of Mathavarn, as
to the final issue of the coming struggle with Richard III. Dafydd
was a country gentleman, a bard, a wizard, and a prophet. On this
occasion, however, he did not know how to prophecy, and was greatly
perplexed. Fortunately, his wife was a very shrewd woman, who, having
discovered her husband's embarrassment or trouble of mind, secretly
advised him to tell Henry that he would be successful in dethroning
Richard III. and in making himself King. She assured her husband that
if the prediction failed of its fulfilment, he would hear no more on
the subject, but that it would make his fortune if confirmed by the
event. Henry went on his way to Bosworth, rejoicing, and we know that
the prophecy became true. Hence originated the proverb, "Cynghor gwraig
heb ei ofyn," which implies that it is always a good thing to follow
a woman's advice, when she gives you an advice without asking for it.

In an old book entitled "The History of the Principality of Wales,
etc.," by Robert Burton, published as early as the year 1695, the
writer when speaking of Cardiganshire says:--"They have a proverb
'Bu Arthur ond tra fu'; that is, 'Arthur was only whilst he was.' It
is honourable for old men if they can say, 'We have been brave
fellows.' They have another proverb, 'Ni thorres Arthur nawdd gwraig,'
that is, 'King Arthur never violated the refuge of a woman.' For
the King was the mirror of knighthood. By the woman's refuge we may
understand her tongue, (and no valiant man will revenge her words
with his blows)."

The above sayings mentioned by Robert Burton 200 years ago have fallen
into disuse now, but I have occasionally heard, "Ni thorres Arthur
nawdd gwraig."


