WAKES IN RADNORSHIRE.

The following account by an eye-witness of a Wake at Disserth, on
July 9th, 1744, will prove of interest:--

"At the end of a mead, by this river side (the R. Ieithon),
were a company dancing in a barn. They were about nine couple,
genteely dressed, and all people of fortune and fashion, and I may
with security say, the best and most active country dancers I ever
saw. We observed that the men were gay and genteel, handsome, and
well shaped; the women were genteel without pride, modest without
affectation, beautiful without art, and free without fondness. The
generous hand of nature appeared in every face, unspotted with the
artful follies of this degenerate age. It gave me a strong idea
of the happiness and simplicity of the ancient Britons before the
Roman and other corruptions overwhelmed the now refined part of the
island (as we are pleased to term it). But these zealots for liberty
maintained their independency long, and under this happy government
they continue (and they never end) their innocent customs, manners
and recreations. A favourite dance (Bumpers Squire Jones) I saw
them perform with the greatest spirits, order and exactness ... the
churchyard, which, though large, was filled with people of almost all
ages and qualities. Near this, was a little house, where we put off our
riding coats, etc. The church is a strong building, and pretty large,
against the tiles of which were a dozen lusty young fellows playing
at tennis, and as many against the steeple at fives. They played very
well, but spoke (as almost every one else did) in the Welsh tongue. On
one side of the church were about six couples dancing to one violin,
and just below three or four couples to three violins, whose seat was a
tombstone. We saw common games of ball played against the sacred pile,
and there also music playing over the bones of the deceased. We were in
the middle of a merry, noisy throng, without knowing their language,
or indeed almost anything they said."--Church Plate of Radnorshire,
by J. T. Evans, quoted from "Pryse's Handbook."






