THE HORSE WEDDING.

The rural weddings in South Wales until very recently were Horse
Weddings; that is, it was the custom of the whole party, both men and
women to ride, and generally at full speed. Poor people generally
managed to obtain the loan of horses for the happy occasion from
their richer neighbours. On the wedding morning the invited guests,
both men and women, married and unmarried, came on their horses and
ponies, some of them from a long distance. The men proceeded to the
bridegroom's house, about a hundred or a hundred and fifty in number
and honourably paid their pwython; whilst the women at the same time
went to the house of the bride, and paid to her their pwython.

"Pwython" was the term used in connection with these weddings to denote
the gifts presented to the young bride and bridegroom respectively,
in return for what the invited guests themselves had received on the
occasion of their own weddings from the young man and the young woman,
or their relations or friends. Of course, a large number of those who
gave gifts were young and unmarried, so that they were not all under
an obligation to give; but still they gave, and they were expected
to give to help the young couple, and by so giving, they were placing
the latter under an obligation to them in the future, that is, in such
cases, the giver gave under the expectation of receiving back gifts of
equal value, whenever his or her own, or one of his or her relations'
wedding took place, even should that happen on the very next day.

After depositing their offerings and taking something to eat, it was
then the custom for ten, twelve, or sometimes even twenty young men,
headed by a bard, a harper, or some fluent speaker, to mount their
horses, and drive away full speed in the direction of the bride's
house to demand her in marriage for the bridegroom. But on the
morning of the wedding, the young woman, that is, the bride-elect,
was not to be got possession of without much trouble and argument,
and searching. When the bridegroom's procession halted at the house of
the bride's parents, the leader of the party, finding the door barred
against their entrance, would formally demand the bride, generally
in rhyme appropriate to the occasion, delivered something as follows:--


   "Open windows, open doors,
    And with flowers strew the floors;
    Heap the hearth with blazing wood,
    Load the spit with festal food;
    The "crochon [2]" on its hook be placed,
    And tap a barrel of the best!
    For this is Catty's wedding day!
    Now bring the fair one out, I pray."


Then one of the bride's party from within made a reply as follows,
with the door still closed:--


   "Who are ye all? ye noisy train!
    Be ye thieves or honest men?
    Tell us now what brings you here,
    Or this intrusion will cost you dear?"


Then the one from without rejoins:--


   "Honest men are we, who seek
    A dainty maid both fair and meek,
    Very good and very pretty,
    And known to all by name of Catty;
    We come to claim her for a bride;
    Come, father, let the fair be tied
    To him who loves her ever well."


The one within again answers:--


   "So ye say, but time will tell;
    My daughter's very well at home
    So ye may pack and homeward roam."


Again the one without exclaims in resolute tones:--


   "Your home no more she's doomed to share
    Like every marriageable fair,
    Her father's roof she quits for one
    Where she is mistress; wooed and won.
    It now remains to see her wedded,
    And homeward brought and safely bedded.
    Unless you give her up, we swear
    The roof from off your house to tear,
    Burst in the doors and batter walls,
    To rescue her whom wedlock calls."


Another of the bridegroom's party then calls aloud, in a voice of
authority:--


   "Ho! peace in the King's name, here, peace!
    Let vaunts and taunting language cease;
    While we the bridesmen, come to sue
    The favour to all bridesmen due,
    The daughter from the father's hand,
    And entertainment kindly bland."


The above rhyme appeared in "Adventures of Twm Shon Catty." There
are a good many such verses composed for, or at such occasion, still
extant in the Welsh language.

The party without and the party within feigned to abuse one another in
such rhymes for an hour, more sometimes, till their wit was exhausted,
but the whole performance was nothing but innocent fun, and the doors
are opened in the end, and the bridegroom's party are admitted into
the house; but even then the trouble is not always over, for it was
the custom for the bride to hide herself, when search would be made
for her everywhere under the tables, beds, behind the doors and every
corner in the house, and at last found, perhaps, under the disguise of
a young man smoking his pipe, or of a "granny" knitting in the corner.

Whoever discovered the bride received a pint of beer and a cake
as a prize in some places. All these things were done for fun or
amusement, but I heard of one young woman at least, who was hiding
in real earnest, and could not be found.

An old farmer near Carmarthen, Griffiths, of Rhenallt, who is 96 years
of age, informed me about five years ago, that he once heard his father
mention of a man called "Dafydd y Llether," a butcher near Alltwalis,
who was disappointed in this manner. This happened about 100 years
ago. This butcher was engaged to be married to a farmer's daughter who
lived in the parish of Llanllwni, about eight miles off, and had made
all preparations for the wedding. When the wedding morning dawned,
Dafydd and his neighbours and friends, about one hundred in number,
mounted their horses at Alltwalis, and galloped away full speed to
Llanllwni, and having arrived at the house of the young bride's
parents, search was made for her everywhere, but she was nowhere
to be found. At last the young man and his friends had to return
home without finding her in great disappointment! The young woman's
parents had prevailed upon her not to marry the young man, "because"
added the old man to me "he was too much of a jolly boy." So they
had contrived between them to hide her where she could not be found
on the wedding morning.

But, to proceed with our account of the old wedding customs, it
was the practice after finding the hidden bride, and partaking of a
little refreshments, for the wedding party to mount their horses,
and they were joined by the bridegroom and his friends, and made
their way towards the church. The young woman was mounted on a fine
and swift horse; but often she had to be content to be mounted behind
her father, or a brother or a friend; and when the latter was the case,
she had to sit on crupper without any pillion, and holding fast to the
man. Then the whole cavalcade would gallop off to church. But during
the procession the bride was seized suddenly by one of her relatives
or friends, stolen away and borne off to a distance. However, this
feigned attempt to run away with her was done only in sport. Then
a chase ensued, when the bridegroom and his friends drove after her
like madmen till they caught her and took her to church. The driving
was so furious on such occasions that legs and arms were sometimes
broken. Mr. D. Jones in his interesting Welsh book on the History of
the Parish of Llangeler, says that in the year 1844, at the wedding
of Dinah, daughter of the Rev. Thomas Jones, Saron, one James Evans,
the groom of the late Colonel Lewes, drove so furiously that his horse
struck against a wall with the result that both the animal and its
rider were killed on the spot, near Llangeler Church! In consequence
of such a melancholy event the Horse Wedding was discontinued in
that part of the country, through the influence of the Vicar, the
Rev. John Griffiths, who preached against the practice from II. Kings,
chap. IX. verse 20 ... "And the driving is like the driving of Jehu
the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously."

The following account of a Horse Wedding appeared in "The Folk Lore of
North Wales" by the late Rev. Elias Owen, F.S.A., whose informant was
the Rev. Canon Griffith Jones, who witnessed the wedding, which took
place at Tregaron, Cardiganshire. We are told that "The friends of
both the young people were on horseback, and according to custom they
presented themselves at the house of the young woman, the one to escort
her to the church, and the other to hinder her from going there. The
friends of the young man were called "Gwyr shegouts." When the young
lady was mounted, she was surrounded by the "gwyr shegouts," and the
cavalcade started. All went on peaceably until a lane was reached, down
which the lady bolted, and here the struggle commenced, for her friends
dashed between her and her husband's friends and endeavoured to force
them back, and thus assist her to escape. The parties, Mr. Jones said,
rode furiously and madly, and the struggle presented a cavalry charge,
and it was not without much apparent danger that the opposition was
overcome, and the lady ultimately forced to proceed to the church,
where her future husband was anxiously awaiting her arrival."

The Lord Bishop of Huron, a native of Cardiganshire, writing to me
from Canada, November 17th., 1909, says:--"I remember a wedding once
when all the guests were on horse-back and there was a hunt for the
bride. There could be no wedding till the bride was caught, and,
Oh the wild gallop over hill and dale till she was taken captive
and led to the altar! The last wedding of that kind to which I refer
took place about 45 years ago. The daughter of Mr. Morgan (I think)
of Maestir, near Lampeter, or his intended wife being the bride. A
very severe accident happened to the bride and that ended the custom
in that neighbourhood."

Although such things as I have already said were done for sport,
yet I have heard of a few cases in which the bride was borne away in
earnest, and disappeared willingly in company of an old lover of hers,
to the intense astonishment and disappointment of the bridegroom,
who happened to be her parents' choice, and not her own. In this case,
the custom of a feigned attempt to run away with the bride had in some
respects served its original purpose; for, undoubtedly, the origin of
the custom of hiding, running away with, and capturing the bride could
be traced back to those barbarous times when marriage by capture was a
common practice. Thus in the Mabinogion, we find that when a King named
Kilydd, after being for some time a widower, wanted to marry again,
one of his counsellors said to him, "I know a wife that will suit thee
well, and she is the wife of King Dogel." And they resolved to go and
seek her; and they slew the King and brought away his wife. When his
son also named Kilhwch wanted a wife, he went to demand her from her
father Yspaddaden Pencawr, the Giant, and obtained her at last after
many adventures, and the help of Arthur and his men. It is probable
that when the Celtic Tribes had settled in Britain that they often
obtained a wife by capturing her from the Aborigines.

This calls to mind the strategy of Romulus to secure wives for his
soldiers by directing them at a given signal to seize Sabine maidens
and run off with them whilst the men were busy in looking at the games.

Another singular instance of wife snatching in ancient times is to be
found in the Book of Judges, for when the men of the tribe of Benjamin
were in difficulty in obtaining wives for themselves, their elders
commanded them to "go and lie in wait in the vineyards; and see,
and behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances,
then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife
of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin,.... And
the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according to
their number, of them that danced, whom they caught." Judges XXI.,
verses 20, 21, and 23.

It seems that some kind of Horse Weddings is in vogue among the
Calmucians, even at the present day, the young woman is first
mounted on her horse and drives off full speed, then the young man,
who is her intended, mounts and chases her, and when he catches her
he can claim her as his wife on the spot; but should she escape him,
he cannot claim her. I well remember when I lived in the Welsh Colony
of Patagonia, about 20 years ago, that it was a very common custom
for a young man and a young woman when in love, to mount their steeds
and take a long ride of 20 miles or more in each other's company,
and whilst driving along together in such manner words of love were
often whispered. Also when a wedding took place, the guests went to
it on their horses, but the old custom of driving after, and capturing
the bride was not observed.

Horse Weddings were very general in West Wales about sixty years ago,
and even twenty years ago in some districts, but I doubt whether
the custom has been continued at the present day in any part of the
country. In the chase after the bride it was supposed that whoever
caught her would be married without doubt within a year from that date,
so it is not to be wondered at that young men drove so furiously on
such occasions.

As soon as the marriage ceremony was over in church, it was once
the custom for a harper in the churchyard to play "Merch Megan,"
"Mentra Gwen," "Morwynion Glan Meirionydd," or some other beautiful
old Welsh Air appropriate to the occasion.

It was also customary in some places, especially in the Northern part
of Cardiganshire, for a certain number of young men to mount their
steeds immediately after the ceremony, and drive off full speed,
for the first who reached the house of the newly-married couple was
to receive a quart of beer and a silk pocket handkerchief, especially
if the young husband and wife were well-to-do.

The ceremony at the Church being over, all the company joined and
returned to the young couple's house, where dinner was provided. On
their return journey again, as in going to Church, they drove
fast. Indeed, it was often the custom to have a regular horse race
on the way home from Church on the wedding day.

The Rev. D. G. Williams gives the following amusing story of such a
race, in connection with a rural wedding which took place not far
from Newcastle Emlyn. There lived a genial old country gentleman
in the north-eastern part of Pembrokeshire, known as Mr. Howells,
Glaspant, who had sent three of his horses to the wedding referred to,
one of them was a pony, considered among the swiftest in the district;
but there was one drawback in connection with the animal. He would
go whichever way he pleased, especially when he was excited. The
wedding procession went along from a house called Gilfach Gweision to
Capel Evan, where the "knot was tied," and as soon as the ceremony
was over the homeward race began in real earnest. The Squire felt
confident that his "Comet," as the pony was named, would be sure to
prove victorious in the race, if the animal could be kept to follow
the road which led on to Cwm Cuch, instead of turning to another road
which led to Mr. Howells' own house, Glaspant. To make sure of this,
the enthusiastic old gentleman in due time, sent all his servants,
both men and women, with walking-sticks and brooms in their hands
to stand where the two roads met, so as to prevent the pony turning
to the one that led to the house. Onward came the wedding cavalcade
at last, the pony taking the lead as Mr. Howells expected, and when
"Comet" saw a rowdy crowd shouting with all their might, and with
brooms and sticks, the animal was glad to pass forward in the right
direction and soon proved himself the hero of the day, and the old
man felt as proud of his pony as the young husband was of his wife.

Another common practice in connection with the weddings in Wales, and
still prevails in some places, was known as Chaining or Halting the
Wedding. As the young husband and wife were driving home from Church
at the end of the wedding ceremony they would find the way obstructed
by ropes stretching the road, covered with flowers, and ribbons, and
evergreens, or sometimes blocked up entirely by thorns. It is said
that this was intended as the first obstacle in married life. Ropes in
some cases were made of straw, and the young couple were not allowed
to pass without paying a footing to the obstructors, and then the
barrier was removed amidst a general hurrah. This chaining or halting
the wedding was known in many parts of West Wales as "codi cwinten,"
or to set up a quintain.

In ancient times Guintain seems to have been some kind of a game of
skill in vogue among several nations; it consisted of an upright post,
on the top of which a cross bar turned on a pivot; "at one end of the
cross hung a heavy sand bag, and at the other was placed a broad plank;
the accomplished cavalier in his passage couched his lance, and with
the point made a thrust at the broad plank, and continued his route
with his usual rapidity, and only felt the "gwyntyn," or the "air" of
the sand bag, fanning his hair as he passed.... The awkward horseman
in attempting to pass this terrific barrier was either unhorsed by
the weight of the sand bag, or by the impulse of the animal against
the bar found his steed sprawling under him on the ground."

In some parts of the country, when the bride or the young wife reaches
home after the wedding ceremony, she buys some small trifle, a pin
or anything from her bridesmaid; and by taking the opportunity of
buying something before her husband has a chance, she'll be master
over him for life! Sometimes the young newly-married couple resorted
to a Wishing Well, and the first to drink the water became the master
in their wedded life!

In Wales, it is considered unlucky to marry on a wet day. It was
considered unlucky for the wedding party to go and return from the
church exactly on the same path, so sometimes it was customary to go
out of the way a bit so as to avoid ill-luck.

It is still customary to decorate the roads where the wedding party
is to pass with arches and bannerettes, bearing mottoes appropriate
to the occasion. This was done in February, 1906, at the wedding
of Mr. David T. Davies, of Penlan, Llanwrda; and at the marriage of
Mr. D. Barlett of Carmarthen in the same month, Llanboidy Parish Church
was tastefully decorated with palms and evergreens, and the village
was gay with bunting and festoons. Such decorations are very common,
especially in connection with a country gentleman's marriage, when
tenants adorn their houses with garlands, and children strew flowers
in the bride's path. It was formerly the custom to pelt the bride and
bridegroom with flowers, and it is still very general to throw rice
at them. I remember this rice-throwing three years ago at Llanilar,
Cardiganshire, at the wedding of a sister of Dr. Rees. Sometimes old
boots were thrown, and I have heard that grains of wheat served the
purpose once. Such things were done to ensure "Good Luck."

In former times the bridal flowers were roses, gentle lady, lady's
fingers, lady-smock, pansy, prickles and furze, and, in order to
encourage the young wife in industry, red clover bloom was strewn in
her pathway.


