NEITHIOR.

When the ceremony at the church and the horse racing which followed
were over, the guests proceeded to the young married couple's house
to partake of some food, and in the afternoon and the evening
they paid their "pwython" to the newly married couple, that is
those of the guests who had not paid already. Others again gave
fresh presents. There was much consumption of beer and cakes on such
occasions always, and the sale of which was a further source of income
to the young couple, so that between everything they were provided
with the means for a good start in their married life. Very often
such a large crowd attended the Neithior, that the house was often
too small to accommodate them all; so a party of the men resorted to
the barn or any other convenient place to drink beer.

It was also customary for the young men to treat the young maidens
with cakes; so there was a good deal of love-making, and often of
rivalry, especially should there be a very pretty girl among the merry
company. Those young maids who were fortunate enough as to be in favour
with the young men had their aprons full of cakes and biscuits, etc.,
to take home with them in the evening. Such festivities as a rule were
very merry and kept up till a late hour, and there was a good deal of
singing, harp-playing and dancing, for the Welsh were expert dancers
in former times; but at the present day dancing is almost unknown,
at least in country places.

On such occasions, it was customary, as a rule, to secure the presence
of a harper, for the harp was from time immemorial a favourite musical
instrument among the Welsh people; for Giraldus Cambrensis writing
700 years ago, says:--"Those who arrive in the morning are entertained
till evening with the conversation of young women and the music of the
harp; for each house has its young women and harps allotted to this
purpose ... and in each family the art of playing on the harp is held
preferable to any other learning." During the last three generations,
however, the dear old instrument with its sweet and melodious sounds
gradually declined in popular favour in Wales, and at the present,
there are but very few who can play on the harp at all, indeed,
in many districts the instrument has entirely disappeared, giving
place to the modern piano. This is to be greatly regretted, and every
patriotic Welshman should do his best to encourage playing on the harp.

It happened once that a "Neithior" or wedding festivities took place,
strange to say, without a wedding! This was about two generations ago
in the Parish of Llandyssul. A man of the name of B. T. Rees, in that
part of the country was engaged to be married to a young woman who was
known as Sally. Two Bidders had been sent round the country to invite
people to the wedding, and all other preparations had been made ready
for the joyful occasion, and everything appeared most promising. But
when B. T. Rees, a few days before the appointed time for the wedding
ceremony, went to visit his bride-elect, she would neither receive
him nor speak to him, but ordered him to depart immediately from
her presence, to the great astonishment and disappointment of Rees,
the bridegroom, and his friends. He endeavoured to reason with her,
but to no purpose. Afterwards some of his friends were sent to speak
to her, but nothing availed; it seemed as if she had suddenly made
up her mind to banish him entirely from her heart.

The wedding was to take place at Henllan on a certain morning, and the
"Neithior" in the afternoon at Llandyssul. When that morning arrived,
the bridegroom and his friends, decided to seek the bride once more,
but she had hidden herself and could not be found anywhere. Rees and
his party were in a strange predicament, and did not know what to do;
but they returned to Llandyssul, and in the afternoon the wedding
festivities were kept up just as if the wedding had actually taken
place; and when night came, Rees had come into possession of large
sums of money from the sale of beer, and donations, or wedding gifts
and the sincere sympathy of the guests, but he had failed to secure
a wife after all! Rees and Sally were married ultimately, however.

In the last century, the Neithior took place on the wedding day; in
former times, however, the festivities were continued on the Sunday,
which followed. Sir S. R. Meyrick, writing about one hundred years ago
says:--"Sunday being come, the bride and bridegroom's business is to
stay at home all day and receive good-will and pwython. This is called
"Neithior." They receive more money this day than Saturday, and all
are written down as before, whether fresh presents, or those repaid."

It seems from what I have been informed by old persons, that such
doings on Sundays had almost disappeared, if not completely so, in
Meyrick's time, at least in most places, but it is evident that Sunday
observances of the kind were common about the middle of the eighteenth
century; and in the old Church Register of the parish of Llanfihangel
Geneu'r Glyn, in Cardiganshire, the following record is found:--

"11 June, 1745. Whereas the parish has been notorious hitherto
in upholding and continuing a wicked custom of keeping Biddings or
meetings upon the Sabbath day to the dishonour of God, and contempt of
religion, to prevent such irregularities for the future, it is this
day ordered by the consent of a vestry legally called and kept that
the said custom shall stop and be discontinued entirely hereafter,
and whosoever within our said parish encourages or practices and
obstinately refuses to obey this our order, we do unanimously consent
and join to punish him to the utmost rigour of the law.--W. Williams,
Clerk, etc."

Such Sunday customs were by degrees discontinued entirely in every
part of Wales, and the Welsh have been for some generations now, and
to their credit still are, the most strict Sabbatarians in the world
with the exception perhaps of the Scotch. The Methodists Revivalists in
the eighteenth century, who greatly inveighed against Sabbath breaking,
contributed towards bringing about this satisfactory state of things.

The curious old Welsh Weddings, which I have endeavoured to describe
in this book do not prevail now; the only surviving feature of them is
perhaps what is known in some parts as "Ystafell," and in other parts
as "Cwyro Ty." "Ystafell" is rather popular now in some districts,
especially between Tregaron and Lampeter, but instead of a Gwahoddwr
or Bidder an aunt or some other near relative of the bride goes round
the houses inviting the neighbours to bring wedding gifts so as to
give the young couple a good start in life.

I have been informed that similar old wedding customs to those
of the Welsh were once in vogue in Cumberland, a county where the
Celtic element is very strong, and also in Brittany, another Celtic
province, and the present custom of wedding gifts which is so common
in connection with fashionable weddings at the present day, is only
a survival of the old Welsh customs.

It seems that in China also it is customary for the friends
and relations of the bride and bridegroom to present them with
wedding gifts, and in Ancient Peru a dwelling was got ready for the
newly-married pair at the charge of the district, and the prescribed
portion of land assigned for their maintenance, and the ceremony of
marriage was followed by general festivities among the friends of
the parties, which lasted several days.






