CHAPTER I.

LOVE CUSTOMS AND OMEN SEEKING.

                           "Pwy sy'n caru, a phwy sy'n peidio,
                            A phwy sy'n troi hen gariad heibio."

                            Who loves, and who loves not,
                            And who puts off his old love?


Undoubtedly, young men and young women all over the world from the
time of Adam to the present day, always had, and still have, their
modes or ways of associating or keeping company with one another
whilst they are in love, and waiting for, and looking forward to,
the bright wedding day. In Wales, different modes of courting prevail;
but I am happy to state the old disgraceful custom of bundling, which
was once so common in some rural districts, has entirely died out,
or at least we do not hear anything about it nowadays. I believe
Wirt Sikes is right in his remarks when he says that such a custom
has had its origin in primitive times, when, out of the necessities
of existence, a whole household lay down together for greater warmth,
with their usual clothing on.

Giraldus Cambrensis, 700 years ago, writes of this custom in these
words:--


        "Propinquo concubantium calore multum adjuti."


Of course, ministers of religion, both the Clergy of the Church of
England and Nonconformist ministers condemned such practice very
sternly, but about two generations ago, there were many respectable
farmers who more or less defended the custom, and it continued to a
certain extent until very recently, even without hardly any immoral
consequences, owing to the high moral standard and the religious
tendencies of the Welsh people.

One reason for the prevalence of such custom was that in times past
in Wales, both farm servants and farmers' sons and daughters were
so busy, from early dawn till a late hour in the evening that they
had hardly time or an opportunity to attend to their love affairs,
except in the night time. Within the memory of hundreds who are
still alive, it was the common practice of many of the young men in
Cardiganshire and other parts of West Wales, to go on a journey for
miles in the depth of night to see the fair maidens, and on their
way home, perhaps, about 3 o'clock in the morning they would see a
ghost or an apparition! but that did not keep them from going out at
night to see the girls they loved, or to try to make love. Sometimes,
several young men would proceed together on a courting expedition,
as it were, if we may use such a term, and after a good deal of idle
talk about the young ladies, some of them would direct their steps
towards a certain farmhouse in one direction, and others in another
direction in order to see their respective sweethearts, and this late
at night as I have already mentioned.

It was very often the case that a farmer's son and the servant
would go together to a neighbouring farm house, a few miles off,
the farmer's son to see the daughter of the house, and the servant to
see the servant maid, and when this happened it was most convenient
and suited them both. After approaching the house very quietly, they
would knock at the window of the young woman's room, very cautiously,
however, so as not to arouse the farmer and his wife.

I heard the following story when a boy:--A young farmer, who lived
somewhere between Tregaron and Lampeter, in Cardiganshire, rode one
night to a certain farm-house, some miles off, to have a talk with the
young woman of his affection, and after arriving at his destination,
he left his horse in a stable and then entered the house to see his
sweetheart. Meanwhile, a farm servant played him a trick by taking
the horse out of the stable, and putting a bull there instead. About
3 o'clock in the morning the young lover decided to go home, and went
to the stable for his horse. It was very dark, and as he entered the
stable he left the door wide open, through which an animal rushed
wildly out, which he took for his horse. He ran after the animal for
hours, but at daybreak, to his great disappointment, found that he
had been running after a bull!

Another common practice is to meet at the fairs, or on the way home
from the fairs. In most of the country towns and villages there are
special fairs for farm servants, both male and female, to resort to;
and many farmers' sons and daughters attend them as well. These fairs
give abundant opportunity for association and intimacy between young
men and women.

Indeed, it is at these fairs that hundreds of boys and girls meet
for the first time. A young man comes in contact with a young girl,
he gives her some "fairings" or offers her a glass of something to
drink, and accompanies her home in the evening. Sometimes when it
happens that there should be a prettier and more attractive maiden
than the rest present at the fair, occasionally a scuffle or perhaps
a fight takes place, between several young men in trying to secure
her society, and on such occasions, of course, the best young man in
her sight is to have the privilege of her company.

As to whether the Welsh maidens are prettier or not so pretty as
English girls, I am not able to express an opinion; but that many of
them were both handsome and attractive in the old times, at least, is
an historical fact; for we know that it was a very common thing among
the old Norman Nobles, after the Conquest, to marry Welsh ladies,
whilst they reduced the Anglo-Saxons almost to slavery. Who has
not heard the beautiful old Welsh Air, "Morwynion Glan Meirionydd"
("The Pretty Maidens of Merioneth")?

Good many men tell me that the young women of the County of
Merioneth are much more handsome than those of Cardiganshire; but
that Cardiganshire women make the best wives.

Myddfai Parish in Carmarthenshire was in former times celebrated
for its fair maidens, according to an old rhyme which records their
beauty thus:--


   "Mae eira gwyn ar ben y bryn,
    A'r glasgoed yn y Ferdre,
    Mae bedw mân ynghanol Cwm-bran,
    A merched glân yn Myddfe."


Principal Sir John Rhys translates this as follows:--


   "There is white snow on the mountain's brow,
    And greenwood at the Verdre,
    Young birch so good in Cwm-bran wood,
    And lovely girls in Myddfe."


In the time of King Arthur of old, the fairest maiden in Wales was
the beautiful Olwen, whom the young Prince Kilhwch married after
many adventures. In the Mabinogion we are informed that "more yellow
was her hair than the flowers of the broom, and her skin was whiter
than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and her fingers
than the blossoms of the wood-anemone, amidst the spray of the meadow
fountain. The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the three-mewed
falcon, was not brighter than hers. Her bosom was more snowy than
the breast of the white swan; her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses. Those who beheld her were filled with her love. Four white
trefoils sprang up wherever she trod. She was clothed in a robe of
flame-coloured silk, and about her neck was a collar of ruddy gold,
on which were precious emeralds and rubies."

A good deal of courting is done at the present day while going home
from church or chapel as the case may be. The Welsh people are
very religious, and almost everybody attends a place of worship,
and going home from church gives young people of both sexes abundant
opportunities of becoming intimate with one another. Indeed, it is
almost a general custom now for a young man to accompany a young lady
home from church.

The Welsh people are of an affectionate disposition, and thoroughly
enjoy the pleasures of love, but they keep their love more secret,
perhaps, than the English; and Welsh bards at all times have been
celebrated for singing in praise of female beauty. Davydd Ap Gwilym,
the chief poet of Wales, sang at least one hundred love songs to his
beloved Morfudd.

This celebrated bard flourished in the fourteenth century, and he
belonged to a good family, for his father, Gwilym Gam, was a direct
descendant from Llywarch Ap Bran, chief of one of the fifteen royal
tribes of North Wales; and his mother was a descendant of the Princes
of South Wales. According to the traditions of Cardiganshire people,
Davydd was born at Bro-Gynin, near Gogerddan, in the Parish of
Llanbadarn-Fawr, and only a few miles from the spot where the town
of Aberystwyth is situated at present.

An ancient bard informs us that Taliesin of old had foretold the
honour to be conferred on Bro-Gynin, in being the birthplace of a
poet whose muse should be as the sweetness of wine:--


    "Am Dafydd, gelfydd goelin--praff awdwr,
        Prophwydodd Taliesin,
      Y genid ym mro Gynin,
      Brydydd a'i gywydd fel gwin."


The poet, Davydd Ap Gwilym, is represented as a fair young man who
loved many, or that many were the young maidens who fell in love with
him, and there is one most amusing tradition of his love adventures. It
is said that on one occasion he went to visit about twenty young ladies
about the same time, and that he appointed a meeting with each of them
under an oak-tree--all of them at the same hour. Meanwhile, the young
bard had secretly climbed up the tree and concealed himself among the
branches, so that he might see the event of this meeting. Every one of
the young girls was there punctually at the appointed time, and equally
astonished to perceive any female there besides herself. They looked
at one another in surprise, and at last one of them asked another,
"What brought you here?" "to keep an appointment with Dafydd ap Gwilym"
was the reply. "That's how I came also" said the other "and I" added
a third girl, and all of them had the same tale. They then discovered
the trick which Dafydd had played with them, and all of them agreed
together to punish him, and even to kill him, if they could get hold
of him. Dafydd, who was peeping from his hiding-place amongst the
branches of the tree, replied as follows in rhyme:--


    "Y butein wen fain fwynnf--o honoch
        I hono maddeuaf,
      Tan frig pren a heulwen haf,
      Teg anterth, t'rawed gyntaf!"


The words have been translated by someone something as follows:--


              "If you can be so cruel,
    Let the kind wanton jade,
    Who oftenest met me in this shade,
    On summer's morn, by love inclined,
    Let her strike first, and I'm resigned."


Dafydd's words had the desired effect. The young women began to
question each other's purity, which led to a regular quarrel between
them, and, during the scuffle, the poet escaped safe and sound.

After this the Poet fell in love with the daughter of one Madog Lawgam,
whose name was Morfudd, and in her honour he wrote many songs, and
it seems that he ever remained true to this lady. They were secretly
married in the woodland; but Morfudd's parents disliked the Poet so
much for some reason or other, that the beautiful young lady was taken
away from him and compelled to marry an old man known as Bwa Bach, or
Little Hunchback. Dafydd was tempted to elope with Morfudd, but he was
found, fined and put in prison; but through the kindness of the men of
Glamorgan, who highly esteemed the Poet, he was released. After this,
it seems that Dafydd was love-sick as long as he lived, and at last
died of love, and he left the following directions for his funeral:--


   "My spotless shroud shall be of summer flowers,
    My coffin from out the woodland bowers:
    The flowers of wood and wild shall be my pall,
    My bier, light forest branches green and tall;
    And thou shalt see the white gulls of the main
    In thousands gather then to bear my train!"


One of Dafydd's chief patrons was his kinsman, the famous and noble
Ivor Hael, Lord of Macsaleg, from whose stock the present Viscount
Tredegar is a direct descendant, and, in judging the character of the
Poet we must take into consideration what was the moral condition of
the country in the fourteenth century.

But to come to more modern times, tradition has it that a young man
named Morgan Jones of Dolau Gwyrddon, in the Vale of Teivi, fell in
love with the Squire of Dyffryn Llynod's daughter. The young man and
the young woman were passionately in love with each other; but the
Squire, who was a staunch Royalist, refused to give his consent to his
daughter's marriage with Morgan Jones, as the young man's grandfather
had fought for Cromwell. The courtship between the lovers was kept on
for years in secret, and the Squire banished his daughter to France
more than once. At last the young lady fell a victim to the small
pox, and died. Just before her death, her lover came to see her,
and caught the fever from her, and he also died. His last wish was
that he should be buried in the same grave as the one he had loved
so dearly, but this was denied him.

In Merionethshire there is a tradition that many generations ago a
Squire of Gorsygedol, near Harlech, had a beautiful daughter who fell
in love with a shepherd boy. To prevent her seeing the young man, her
father locked his daughter in a garret, but a secret correspondence
was carried on between the lovers by means of a dove she had taught
to carry the letters. The young lady at last died broken-hearted,
and soon after her burial the dove was found dead upon her grave! And
the young man with a sad heart left his native land for ever.

More happy, though not less romantic, was the lot of a young man who
was shipwrecked on the coast of Pembrokeshire, and washed up more dead
than alive on the seashore, where he was found by the daughter and
heiress of Sir John de St. Bride's, who caused him to be carried to
her father's house where he was hospitably entertained. The young man,
of course, was soon head and ears in love with his fair deliverer,
and the lady being in nowise backward in response to his suit, they
married and founded a family of Laugharnes, and their descendants
for generations resided at Orlandon, near St. Bride's.

The Rev. D. G. Williams in his interesting Welsh collection of the
Folk-lore of Carmarthenshire says that in that part of the county which
borders on Pembrokeshire, there is a strange custom of presenting a
rejected lover with a yellow flower, or should it happen at the time
of year when there are no flowers, to give a yellow ribbon.

This reminds us of a curious old custom which was formerly very common
everywhere in Wales; that of presenting a rejected lover, whether
male or female, with a stick or sprig of hazel-tree. According to
the "Cambro Briton," for November, 1821, this was often done at a
"Cyfarfod Cymhorth," or a meeting held for the benefit of a poor
person, at whose house or at that of a neighbour, a number of young
women, mostly servants, used to meet by permission of their respective
employers, in order to give a day's work, either in spinning or
knitting, according as there was need of their assistance, and,
towards the close of the day, when their task was ended, dancing
and singing were usually introduced, and the evening spent with glee
and conviviality. At the early part of the day, it was customary for
the young women to receive some presents from their several suitors,
as a token of their truth or inconstancy. On this occasion the lover
could not present anything more odious to the fair one than the sprig
of a "collen," or hazel-tree, which was always a well-known sign of
a change of mind on the part of the young man, and, consequently,
that the maiden could no longer expect to be the real object of his
choice. The presents, in general, consisted of cakes, silver spoons,
etc., and agreeably to the respectability of the sweetheart, and were
highly decorated with all manner of flowers; and if it was the lover's
intention to break off his engagement with the young lady, he had only
to add a sprig of hazel. These pledges were handed to the respective
lasses by the different "Caisars," or Merry Andrews,--persons dressed
in disguise for the occasion, who, in their turn, used to take each
his young woman by the hand to an adjoining room where they would
deliver the "pwysi," or nose-gay, as it was called, and afterwards
immediately retire upon having mentioned the giver's name.

When a young woman also had made up her mind to have nothing further to
do with a young man who had been her lover, or proposed to become one,
she used to give him a "ffon wen," (white wand) from an hazel tree,
decorated with white ribbons. This was a sign to the young man that
she did not love him.

The Welsh name for hazel-tree is "collen." Now the word "coll" has a
double meaning; it means to lose anything, as well as a name for the
hazel, and it is the opinion of some that this double meaning of the
word gave the origin to the custom of making use of the hazel-tree
as a sign of the loss of a lover.

It is also worthy of notice, that, whilst the hazel indicated the
rejection of a lover, the birch tree, on the other hand, was used as an
emblem of love, or in other words that a lover was accepted. Among the
Welsh young persons of both sexes were able to make known their love to
one another without speaking, only by presenting a Birchen-Wreath. This
curious old custom of presenting a rejected lover with a white wand
was known at Pontrhydfendigaid, in Cardiganshire until only a few
years ago. My informant was Dr. Morgan, Pontrhydygroes.  Mrs. Hughes,
Cwrtycadno, Llanilar, also informed me that she had heard something
about such custom at Tregaron, when she was young.

It was also the custom to adorn a mixture of birch and quicken-tree
with flowers and a ribbon, and leave it where it was most likely to
be found by the person intended on May-morning. Dafydd ap Gwilym, the
poet, I have just referred to, mentions of this in singing to Morfudd.

Young people of both sexes, are very anxious to know whether they
are to marry the lady or the gentleman they now love, or who is to
be their future partner in life, or are they to die single. Young
people have good many most curious and different ways to decide all
such interesting and important questions, by resorting to uncanny
and romantic charms and incantations. To seek hidden information by
incantation was very often resorted to in times past, especially about
a hundred years ago, and even at the present day, but not as much
as in former times. It was believed, and is perhaps, still believed
by some, that the spirit of a person could be invoked, and that it
would appear, and that young women by performing certain ceremonies
could obtain a sight of the young men they were to marry.

Such charms were performed sometimes on certain Saints' Days, or on
one of the "Three Spirits' Nights," or on a certain day of the moon;
but more frequently on "Nos Calan Gauaf" or All Hallows Eve--the
31st. of October. All Hallows was one of the "Three Spirits' Nights,"
and an important night in the calendar of young maidens anxious to
see the spirits of their future husbands.

In Cardiganshire, divination by means of a ball of yarn, known as
"coel yr edau Wlan" is practised, and indeed in many other parts of
Wales. A young unmarried woman in going to her bedroom would take
with her a ball of yarn, and double the threads, and then she would
tie small pieces of wool along these threads, so as to form a small
thread ladder, and, opening her bedroom window threw this miniature
ladder out to the ground, and then winding back the yarn, and at the
same time saying the following words:--


    "Y fi sy'n dirwyn
        Pwy sy'n dal"


which means:


    "I am winding,
        Who is holding?"


Then the spirit of the future husband of the girl who was performing
the ceremony was supposed to mount this little ladder and appear to
her. But if the spirit did not appear, the charm was repeated over
again, and even a third time. If no spirit was to be seen after
performing such ceremony three times, the young lady had no hope
of a husband. In some places, young girls do not take the trouble
to make this ladder, but, simply throw out through the open window,
a ball of yarn, and saying the words:


    "I am winding, who is holding."


Another custom among the young ladies of Cardiganshire in order
to see their future husbands is to walk nine times round the house
with a glove in the hand, saying the while--"Dyma'r faneg, lle mae'r
llaw."--"Here's the glove, where is the hand?" Others again would
walk round the dungheap, holding a shoe in the left hand, and saying
"Here's the shoe, where is the foot?" Happy is the young woman who
sees the young man she loves, for he is to be her future husband.

In Carmarthenshire young girls desirous of seeing their future
partners in life, walk round a leek bed, carrying seed in their hand,
and saying as follows:--


   "Hadau, hadau, hau,
    Sawl sy'n cam, doed i grynhoi."

   "Seed, seed, sowing.
    He that loves, let him come to gather."


It was also the custom in the same county for young men and young
women to go round a grove and take a handful of moss, in which was
found the colour of the future wife or husband's hair.

In Pembrokeshire, it is the custom for young girls to put under
their pillow at night, a shoulder of mutton, with nine holes bored
in the blade bone, and at the same time they put their shoes at the
foot of the bed in the shape of the letter T, and an incantation is
said over them. By doing this, they are supposed to see their future
husbands in their dreams, and that in their everyday clothes. This
curious custom of placing shoes at the foot of the bed was very
common till very recently, and, probably, it is still so, not only
in Pembrokeshire, but with Welsh girls all over South Wales. A woman
who is well and alive told me once, that many years ago she had
tried the experiment herself, and she positively asserted that she
actually saw the spirit of the man who became her husband, coming
near her bed, and that happened when she was only a young girl, and
some time before she ever met the man. When she was telling me this,
she had been married for many years and had grown-up children, and
I may add that her husband was a particular friend of mine.

Another well-known form of divination, often practised by the young
girls in Carmarthenshire, Cardiganshire and Pembrokeshire, is for
a young woman to wash her shirt or whatever article of clothing she
happens to wear next to the skin, and having turned it inside out,
place it before the fire to dry, and then watch to see who should come
at midnight to turn it. If the young woman is to marry, the spirit
of her future husband is supposed to appear and perform the work for
the young woman, but if she is to die single, a coffin is seen moving
along the room, and many a young girl has been frightened almost to
death in performing these uncanny ceremonies. The Rev. D. G. Williams
in his excellent Welsh essay on the Folk-lore of Carmarthenshire,
mentions a farmer's daughter who practised this form of divination
whilst she was away from home at school. A young farmer had fallen
in love with her, but she hated him with all her heart. Whilst she
was performing this ceremony at midnight, another girl, from mere
mischief dressed herself in man's clothing, exactly the same kind
as the clothes generally worn by the young farmer I have mentioned,
and, trying to appear as like him as possible, entered the room at
the very moment when the charm of invoking the spirit of a future
husband was being performed by the farmer's daughter, who went half
mad when she saw, as she thought, the very one whom she hated so much,
making his appearance.

The other girls had to arouse their schoolmistress from her bed
immediately so that she might try and convince the young girl that
she had seen nothing, but another girl in man's clothes. But nothing
availed. The doctor was sent for, but he also failed to do anything
to bring her to herself, and very soon the poor young woman died
through fright and disappointment.

Another common practice in West Wales is for a young woman to peel
an apple at twelve o'clock, before a looking glass in order to see
the spirit of her future husband. This also is done on All Hallow's
Eve. Sowing Hemp Seed is also a well-known ceremony among the young
ladies of Wales, as well as England.


