ST. DAVID'S DAY.

St. David is the Patron Saint of Wales, and strange to say the only
Welsh Saint in the Calendar of the Western Church (Canonized by
Calixtus II.) more than five hundred years after his death.

His day is celebrated on the 1st of March throughout the world where
Welshmen are. In Wales there are in some places grand dinners, and
speeches are made and songs sung, and at present it is customary
to conduct Divine Service on the day even in St. Paul's Cathedral,
London. But perhaps the most characteristic feature of the day is
the wearing of the Leek, though it must be admitted that wearing
the Leek on St. David's Day is not very general in the country
districts of Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire at the present day,
but the interesting old custom is reviving, especially in the towns,
and every true-born Welshman ought to wear on the 1st of March the
Welsh National Emblem which is dedicated to St. David.

The origin of the custom is not known, there are many who positively
assert that it originated in the days of St. David himself; that is,
according to some traditions, during a memorable battle against the
Saxons the Welsh obtained a complete victory over their enemies. During
the engagement the Welsh had leeks in their hats on the occasion for
their military colour and distinction of themselves, by persuasion
of the said prelate St. David.

According to other traditions, the battle of Poictiers has been named;
also that of Cressy, when the Welsh archers did good service with the
English against the French, under Edward the Black Prince of Wales,
and Shakespeare alludes to this in Henry V.:--

Fluellen says to Henry: "If your Majesty is remembered of it,
the Welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow,
wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps; which your Majesty knows, to
this hour is an honourable badge of the service; and, I do believe,
your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek on St. Tavy's Day."

King Henry: "I wear it for a memorable honour; for I am Welsh, you
know, good countryman."

It seems that there was a custom in London 250 years ago of hanging
effigies of Welshmen on St. David's Day; for Pepys says:--

(March 1, 1667). In Mark Lane I do observe (it being St. David's Day),
the picture of a man dressed like a Welshman, hanging by the neck upon
one of the poles that stand out at the top of one of the merchants'
houses, in full proportion and very handsomely done, which is one of
the oddest sights I have seen a good while.


