A PRESENT-DAY WELSH QUEEN OF MAY.

The May-pole in Wales was called Bedwen, because it was always made
of birch which is called in Welsh Bedwen, a tree associated with the
gentler emotions; and as I have already observed in another chapter,
to give a lover a birchen branch, is for a maiden to accept his
addresses. Games of various sorts were played around the bedwen. The
fame of a village depended on its not being stolen away, and parties
were constantly on the alert to steal the bedwen, a feat which, when
accomplished, was celebrated with peculiar festivities. This rivalry
for the possession of the May-pole was probably typical of the ancient
idea that the first of May was the boundary day dividing the confines
of winter and summer, when a fight took place between the powers of
the air, on the one hand striving to continue the reign of winter on
the other to establish that of summer.

Here may be cited the Mabinogi of Kilhwch and Olwen, where it speaks
of the daughter of Lludd Llaw Eraint. She was the most splendid maiden
in the three Islands of the mighty, and in three islands adjacent,
and for her does Gwyn Ap Nudd, the fairy King, fight every first of
May till the day of doom.

She was to have been the bride of Gwythyr, the son of Greidawl,
when Gwyn Ap Nudd carried her off by force. The bereaved bridegroom
followed, and there was a bloody struggle, in which Gwyn was
victorious, and he acted most cruelly, for he slew an old warrior,
took out his heart from his breast, and constrained the warrior's
son to eat the heart of his father.

When Arthur heard of this he summoned Gwyn Ap Nudd before him,
and deprived him of the fruits of his victory. But he condemned the
two combatants to fight for the maiden Olwen henceforth for ever on
every first of May till doomsday; the victor on that day to possess
the maiden.

In former times a fire of logs was kindled on the first day of May,
around which it was customary for men and women, youths and maidens,
to dance hand in hand, singing to the harp, and some of the men would
leap over the fire, even at the peril of being burnt. The origin of
such strange custom is undoubtedly to be traced to the "belltaine"
fires of the Druids.

It seems these bon-fires were lighted in some parts of Wales on
Midsummer Eve, and the "Glain Nadrodd" (snake-stones) were also,
according to Welsh traditions, associated with the same time of
the year.

It is called Glain Nadrodd from the old Welsh tradition that it is
made by snakes at some special gathering among them, when one of
their number is made a kind of sacrifice out of the body of which
they manufacture the stone. It is of a greenish colour and of the
size of an ordinary marble. To find a "Glain Nadrodd" is considered
a very lucky omen and they were anciently used as charms. It was
also believed in former times that the bon-fires lighted in May or
Midsummer protected the lands from sorcery, so that good crops would
follow. The ashes were also considered valuable as charms.



ALLHALLOW'S EVE (NOS CALAN GAEA.)

The Eve of All Saints is known in Wales as "Nos Calan Gaeaf," and
in former times there were many old customs in connection with it,
most of which have now disappeared. I have already given an account
of the Love Charms and spells which were performed on this eve, and
amongst other strange doings, the uncanny custom of going round the
Church in order to see the spirit of a future husband or wife. But
there was in some places another weird ceremony of going round the
church at midnight, and look in through the keyhole in order to see
the spectral forms, or to hear a spirit calling the names of all those
who were to die in the neighbourhood during the year; that is during
the coming twelve months from that date, which seems to suggest that
the new year began at this time once in old times. Many were afraid,
especially children, of going out on Allhallow's Eve as the night
among the Welsh was one of the "tair nos ysprydion" (three spirits'
nights) as it was supposed that the spirits were free to roam about,
and a demon at large in the form of a "Hwch ddu gwta" (black sow
without a tail)


   "Nos Calan Gaea',
    Bwbach ar bob camfa."

    (On Allhallow's Eve,
    A bogie on every stile.)


On this eve it was formerly the custom to kindle a bonfire, a practice
which continued to a more recent date in the Northern part of the
Principality than in the South.

Besides fuel, each person present used to throw into the fire a small
stone, with a mark whereby he should know it again. If he succeeded
in finding the stone on the morrow, the year would be a lucky one
for him, but the contrary if he failed to recover it.

Those who assisted at the making of the bonfire watched until the
flames were out, and then somebody would raise the usual cry, when each
ran away for his life, lest he should be found last, and be overtaken
by the 'bogie.'--(See "Celtic Folk-Lore," by Sir J. Rhys, page 225.)

When a boy, I well remember young men and boys who were full of
mischief, making a hollow inside a turnip, and having put a candle
in it, carried it about as a bogie to frighten timid people.

Allhallow's Eve is known in many parts of West Wales as "Nos twco
fale," (apple snatching night), and the game of snatching apples, has
been continued in some districts until only a few years ago. Apples
and candles, fastened to strings, were suspended from the ceiling
and the merry-makers in trying to catch the apple frequently got
the candle instead, to the great amusement of those present. Another
amusing custom was to try to bring up an apple with the teeth from
a tub of water.

In some parts of the country, especially Carmarthenshire, it was
customary to peel the apple carefully, and throw it, that is the peel,
back over the head. Then when this peel had fallen on the floor behind
one's back, particular notice was taken in what form it appeared, and
whenever it resembled a letter of the Alphabet, the same was supposed
to be the first letter of the Christian name of the thrower's future
wife or husband.



HARVEST CUSTOMS, Etc.

"Y Gaseg Fedi, or Harvest Mare."

In West and Mid-Wales there have been various harvest customs, the
most interesting of which was probably the Harvest Mare, known in
Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire as "Y Gaseg Fedi, or Gaseg Ben-Fedi,"
but in Pembrokeshire it was called "Y Wrach." This took place at the
end of the harvest.

There was a large crowd of both men and women reaping on the last
day; and by working at the harvest in this manner small cottagers
and other poor people paid the farmer for the privilege of planting
a few rows of potatoes in the land, and for the loan of a horse and
cart, or for carting home coal, etc.. By working at the harvest poor
people paid their debt to the farmer, and still do so to a certain
extent. To each of the women who worked at the harvest was given a
candle to take home with her every evening, and to the men a little
tobacco was given to those who indulged in the bad habit of smoking.

An old woman 98 years of age, who lived near Crosswood, Cardiganshire,
informed me about three years ago that she well recollected when a
child that a farmer who lived at Penllwyn, in the Vale of Rheidol,
used to give to each of the men and women a sheaf to take home with
them in the evening, and that this farmer was the only one in the
country who did this within her memory, and that he did it as he had
seen his father doing so. The old lady also added that the custom
had been general once.

It was the custom once to "dwrn fedi" (fist reaping) a very laborious
work, for our forefathers had no scythes nor machines in former times,
so that the sickle was everything. It was customary once for a number
of farmers in the same district to arrange together not to cut their
fields on the same day so that they might be able to assist each
other. A few men would come together on an appointed day from each
farm in the district that they might be able to cut and bind all the
corn of one farm in a single day; and it is still the custom in many
places to do this in connection with hay as well as shearing sheep
on the mountains.

The Gaseg Fedi (harvest mare) at the end of the harvest was a small
quantity of the last corn which was left standing in the field, and
tied up carefully; and great excitement existed, and much amusement
was created when the last standing was reached. There was a good
deal of fun in connection with cutting the mare. Each reaper in his
turn was allowed to throw his sickle at the corn until it was cut,
from a distance of about 15 or 20 yards. The most unskilful were
allowed to try first, at last some one would succeed in cutting it
down amidst cheers. After cutting it down, it was customary in some
places, especially in the North of Cardiganshire for one of the men
to take the mare to a neighbouring farm, where the harvest had not
been completed, and where the reapers would be still busy at work. The
man who took the mare in this manner was very careful to go, or crept
without being observed, and stealthily stationed himself over against
the foreman of his neighbour's reapers, he watched an opportunity,
when within easy distance of throwing it suddenly over the hedge into
his neighbour's field, and if possible upon the foreman's sickle and
at the same time repeating some insulting words and took to his heels
with all speed to escape the flying sickle of the reapers whom he had
insulted which were hurled after him, and sometimes he was in peril
of his life. In some districts in Carmarthenshire, it was sometimes
the practice to be as bold as to take the Gaseg even to the very house
of the neighbour, but this was considered more insulting if anything
than throwing it into his field.

According to old people who remembered the custom in their younger
days, they informed me that it was not considered right to throw
the mare into the field of a farmer who lived in another parish,
or over a river or even a brook. I was also informed by some that it
was not allowable to bear it up hill to a field which stood on a more
elevated ground. It was often the custom especially in Carmarthenshire
and Pembrokeshire, instead of throwing it into a neighbour's field, to
convey it home to the house, that is to the house of the farmer himself
who had finished his harvest that day. The honour of bearing it home
in this manner belonged to the one who had succeeded in cutting it,
but the difficult part of it was how to take it into the house dry,
for it was absolutely necessary that it should be taken into the
house without being wetted. And this was not always an easy task as
the servant maids at the house carefully stored water in buckets and
pans ready to throw over the man and his Caseg Fedi at his entrance;
and sometimes he would have a pretty rough time of it. In order to
prevent this the man tried to appear as indifferent as possible so as
not to be suspected by the girls. Consequently, he carefully hid the
mare under his clothes, but in spite of everything he was sometimes
stripped of some part of his garment or deluged with water. But when he
could succeed in bringing it into the house dry and hung it up without
being observed, the master had to pay the bearer a shilling or two,
or to give him plenty of beer. But the master was spared to pay the
shilling if the girls could succeed in wetting the mare. These curious
old customs have been discontinued, but it is still the practice
with some to bring a handful of corn into the house tied up under
the name of the mare. At supper that evening there was a good deal
of fun. John Wright, Bailiff of Stackpole in Pembrokeshire, refers to
the custom as follows when writing to his master, Mr. Pryce Campbell,
August, 1736:--"Whilst I was abroad (he had been in Cardiganshire)
the harvest people cut the neck, and, notwithstanding all the
stones about the court (this house was being rebuilt), would have
a dance. The dance was the Three Shopkins. There was a noble feast,
the bill of fare was as follows:--Four quarters of mutton, a side of
bacon, a piece of beef weighing half a hundred-weight, twelve gallons
of Buding besides, cabotch and other greens. They seemed very well
pleased with their entertainment." It was customary in some places
to have a harvest queen attired in white gown decorated with ears
of wheat and roses. In other places a sheaf of wheat was decorated
with ribbons and taken home to the farm on the top of the last load,
when the horses were also very gaily decked.

At the close of the harvest it was an universal custom to have a
harvest supper, and after the feast there was a merry time. The
Rev. D. G. Williams mentions "Chware Dai Shon Goch" and "Rhibo"
as favourite games on such occasions.

"Chware Dai Shon Goch" was something as follows:--

Two young men, or two young women would put on some old ragged clothes
kept at the farm for that purpose, and thus attired would proceed
to the barn where a walking-stick was given to each of the two. Then
followed a most curious dance to the great amusement of the company
of beholders. At present, however, the Welshpeople in country places
know nothing of dancing; but it is evident that they were much given
to dancing in former times as well as singing to the harp. Owen Tudor,
the Welsh gentleman who became the grandfather of Henry VII., King
of England, was invited to dance some of the dances of Wales before
Katherine, the beautiful widow of Henry V. While the handsome young
Welshman was dancing one of his wild reels, it chanced that he fell
against the Queen, and the latter with a bewitching smile, said,
"that so far from offending her, it would only increase the pleasure
of herself and company, if he would repeat the same false step or
mistake!" Later on, Katherine and Owen Tudor were married.

Another game on such occasions was "Rhibo" which was something as
follows:--

Six young men were selected for the performance, three standing face
to face to the other three, and each one taking hold of the hands of
the one who faced him. Then upon the arms of these six young men,
a young man and a young woman were placed in a leaning posture who
were thrown up and allowed to fall again into the arms of the young
men, and this ceremony continued for some time, and which appeared
to be rather a rough game, but it is not practised at the present day.

In former times it was customary at some farms to blow the horn
at harvest time to call the reapers both to their work and their
meals. Such horn was made use of for that purpose until very recently
at a farm called Eurglodd, eight miles north of Aberystwyth in
Cardiganshire.


