CYNNOS.

"Cynnos" was a practice among the farmers of West Wales, and
particularly Cardiganshire, of taking the corn to the kiln to be dried
on the night before the grinding; it was customary to sit watching it
all night and carefully attend to the drying operations, that is the
turning of the corn on the kiln, and the sweeping of it off, when
it had been sufficiently dried. The meaning of the word "Cynnos"
is unknown, according to some writers it is a form of "cynwys"
(contents)--that is the contents of a stack of corn; but according
to others it meant "cyn-nos" (the night before) that is the night
before the grinding.

It is true that the farmers sent small quantities of corn to the mill
at any time of the year; but the big annual "cynnos" was prepared,
as a rule, about January or February. This "Cynnos" was a night of
great fun, especially for young people, as many of the friends and
neighbours of those who were engaged in drying the corn came together
in the evening. An old gentleman named Thomas Evans, Gwarallyryn in
the parish of Llandyssul, Cardiganshire, who well remembered the
old custom, gave me an interesting account of it. This meeting of
young men and young women and others at the kiln during the Cynnos to
enjoy themselves with games and story telling was known, said he, as
"Shimli," which often continued all night. Sometimes beer known as
"Fetchin," was sent for, and drank around the kiln fire. When the
flour was taken home, it was put in chests. Previous to the beginning
of the 19th century before kilns attached to the mills became general,
many of the farm houses had a kiln for drying the corn at home, but
of a very primitive sort. Mr. Price in his interesting little book on
Llansawel, in Carmarthenshire, says that the last kiln of the sort for
drying the corn at home in that parish was in use at a farm called
Cilwenau isaf, worked as late as 1845. He also adds that the shape
and the build of this primitive contrivance was something as follows:--

On a gentle-sloping ground a hollow, three yards long, two yards wide,
and two deep, was cut, and two planks placed at right angles to each
other, their ends resting on the surface outside the hollow. These
served to support the sticks which were placed regularly over the kiln
until covered. Over the whole clean straw was laid, upon which the
corn was placed to be dried. Underneath all this and at the lower
end of the kiln, the fire was placed, so that the heat and smoke
went under the straw contrivance above. About the month of May,
it was once customary in Pembrokeshire for farmers to bring their
"Benwent," that is, two or three loads of grain to the mill to be
ground and milled, and young men and young women came together on
such occasions, and indulged in a sport known as "Byng," or dressing
up a horse's head and carrying it about, not unlike "Mari Lwyd." The
Rev. Jenkin Evans, Pontfaen, in the "Pembrokeshire Antiquities,"
also adds that it was customary on May Day for women and children to
go round the farmhouses with their basins to receive butter, which
enabled poor people to enjoy butter on their bread for some weeks.


