SHEEP SHEARING CUSTOMS.

The following extract which I translate from an introduction to a
volume of Welsh Poems known as "Cerddi Cerngoch," gives an interesting
account of Sheep Shearing customs in West Wales fifty years ago:--

"A great day at Blaenplwyf was the sheep shearing day, The sheep
were kept for the summer at Bronbyrfe, Llanddewi Brefi, with John
Jenkins. During Ffair Beder (Peter's Fair) July 10th every year there
was a "cnaif" (shearing). Good many were anxious to get the "fei." The
service of about half-a-dozen neighbours was secured to look after
the shearing. David Davies, Rhiwonen; John Davies, Pantfedwen; Thomas
Davies, Pencoed; Daniel Davies, Gelligwenin, had been doing it; and
my father, and my uncles of Trecefel, Pant, Penbryn and Clwtpatrwn,
were faithful year after year. To swell the company, others from time
to time took a day's holiday and enjoyment, and amongst many others,
Mr. J. E. Rogers, Abermeurig; Rev. Evan Evans, Hafod; Rev. John Davies,
Llandeloy; Thos. Thomas (Norton Brewery), Carmarthen; Ben. Jenkins,
solicitor; Aeronian, etc.

Llwyd, Llundain, told me: "When my father failed going to the shearing,
my brother Shanco, or myself, was allowed to go, and we longed to go,
for it was the very thing for us. Little work and plenty of enjoyment,
and you know that not one of Shencyn Grufydd's family had any objection
to a thing of that kind. A start was made from Blaenplwyf at five
o'clock in the morning. At first it was customary to proceed on horses
through Llanfair and over the bog and meadow to Bronbyrfe. One or
two young women went to look after the wool. It was brought home on
horses. After that 'gist cart' and the 'long body' came in use, and
lastly the 'gambo.' When going over the mountain one time (1855), and
'Cerngoch,' to be sure, among the foremost of the mounted band, Shencyn
gave out the order to form into a rank as soldiers, and after getting
things into order, he said:--"Here we are now like cavalry attacking
the Russians." "Not quite so," said Cerngoch, "if we were in the
Crimea, you my little brother, would not be so far in advance of us."

Timothy and Benjamin were in School of Parkyvelvet, under the
celebrated old tutor, Rev. Titus Evans, in 1855, and both of them
and their second cousin, Mr. Thomas, Myrtle Villa, Wellfield Road,
Carmarthen (now) had come on their holidays, and forming a part of
the company. As Mr. Thomas was a townsman, he was not acquainted with
the horse and the land, so the horse went out of the path, and into
the bog, and Cerngoch sang at once:--


  "'Roedd mab o dre Caerfyrddin,
    Yn steilus iawn a'i ferlin;
    Wrth dd'od ar 'mynydd yn y mawn,
    Bu'n isel iawn ei asyn."


.... After reaching Bronbyrfe, those who were responsible went in for
the shearing; but the others scattered along the small brooks which
were close by in order to fish; each one with his favourite tackle,
hands, fly, hook and bait, etc. Hywel was by far the master. When
all the others had failed with the fly and bait, Hywel would have
a basketful. He was so clever with the fly--the bait according
to the colour of the water.... After eating the black nourishing
fish, and ending the shearing, it was customary to go home through
Llanddewi. The young men of Llanddewi knew when the Blaenplwyf shearing
took place, and were watching them on their homeward journey with great
excitement. Then (at Llanddewi) a game of ball was played on the corner
of the old chapel, near the Foelallt Arms since then. Not an air ball
as at present, but a ball of yarn carefully wound up, and covered with
leather as tight as possible. Four were the required number intended
to take part in the game, two on each side. "After drinking the health
of those who won, off goes the party, each one for the first making for
Bettws, about five miles nearer home. Then a game of quoits took place
on the commons, as the horses were having their breath, a good excuse
for the men to get a drop of "home-brewed" at the Derry Arms. Two miles
more, and they reach home at Blaenplwyf at 9 p.m., after a busy and
enjoyable day. A feast waited them, my grandmother having been busy
all day preparing--cawl--new potatoes--white cabbages--and gooseberry
tart. She could make delicious food and taught her daughters also to
do so."



TAI UNNOS (ONE NIGHT HOUSES).

In former times in Wales when the population was small, much of the
land in mountainous regions was a common, and the farmers and others
were at liberty to send their cattle and sheep there to graze, and
people obtained peat from such places to burn on the fire. But if a
poor family could succeed to erect a small rude house, or hut in one
night on the outskirts of a common, or a desolate spot on the mountain
side, or a dreary dingle, they claimed from ancient usage their right
to the spot. Such a house was called "Ty Unnos" (one night house). If
a man building a Ty Unnos of such kind was discovered in building it
during the night by one of his neighbours, people would come and throw
it down and scatter everything, to prevent him taking possession of a
place which they regarded as belonging to all. So that any one building
a Ty Unnos had to do it in one single night, and that secretly,
without being detected. I recollect such a house being built on the
mountain of Llanddewi Brefi many years ago when I was a boy. After
securing a house in this manner the next step was to add land to it,
taken and enclosed patch by patch from the surrounding common, so
that quite a farm of freehold property was created in course of time,
if the intrusion remained unnoticed. But it was necessary for a man
to show a great deal of shrewdness to secure a farm in this manner.

In the parish of Llanarth, Cardiganshire, there is a spot known as
"Mynydd Shion Cwilt." According to tradition this Shion Cwilt was
a shrewd and eccentric character who built a Ty-Unnos, and secured
much land from Common.


