SCHOOL CUSTOMS.

In South Wales, especially Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire, about
seventy or eighty years ago, most curious customs were in vogue,
which were intended to assist the Welsh children to learn English.

In many Schools in those days, English was taught in rhymes, such
as follows:--


   "Hearth is aelwyd, fire is tân,
    Cloth is brethyn, wool is gwlan,
    Ash is onen, oak is derwen,
    Holly tree is pren cerdynen,
    House is ty, and mill is melin,
    Fiddle is crwyth, and harp is telyn,
    River is afon, brook is nant,
    Twenty is ugnin, hundred is cant."



THE WELSH "NOTE," OR "NOT".

In order to enforce the use of the English language in Schools the
Schoolmasters of those days made use of what was called the Welsh
"Note," which was a piece of stick about three or four inches long,
with the letters "W.N." marked on it, and in some places it had the
following words in full: "Welsh Note, a slap for every time you speak
Welsh." This "Welsh Note" was in reality nothing but a devise to find
out the children who spoke Welsh, as it was then thought that unless
the mother tongue was banished from Schools, monoglot Welsh children
could not learn English.

During the night-time, of course, the "Welsh Note" was in possession
of the Schoolmaster, who, when School began in the morning, gave
it secretly to one of the boys with directions to keep it until
he caught some one speaking Welsh, to whom he was to hand it over,
and this boy in his turn was to hand it over to another delinquent,
and so forth. The "Welsh Note" might during the day perhaps pass
through about twenty different hands; and at the close of the School
in the evening the Schoolmaster would call for it and the boy in whose
possession it was found got the first taste of the cane on his naked
hand; then he returned it to the boy from whom he got it, and he in
like manner was caned in his turn, and so on over the twenty, more or
less, each in his turn getting a taste of the cane, until the first
boy is reached, whose name is on the register. Then the "Welsh Note"
returns to the Schoolmaster, ready for use for the next occasion.

There is no "Welsh Note" at the present day, and the Welsh language
is taught in many if not in most of the Schools.






