ORIGIN OF FAIRIES.

Concerning the imaginary origin of the Fairies, it was once a belief
in Wales that they were the souls of the virtuous Druids, who not
having been Christians, could not enter into heaven, but were too
good to be cast into hell!

Another curious belief was that in our Saviour's time there lived
a woman whose fortune it was to be possessed of near a score of
children, and as she saw our Blessed Lord approach her dwelling, being
ashamed of being so prolific, and that He might not see them all,
she concealed about half of them closely, and, after His departure,
when she went in search of them, to her surprise she found they were
gone. They never afterwards could be discovered, for it was supposed
that as a punishment from heaven, for hiding what God had given her,
she was deprived of them; and, it is said, these, her offspring,
have generated the race of beings called the Fairies.

As to the realistic origin of the Fairies, according to the theories
of the learned, they were either the ancient Aborigines, living
in seclusion so as to hide themselves from their more powerful
conquerors, or the persecuted Druids living in subterraneous places,
venturing forth only at night. Whether ancient Aborigines hiding from
their conquerors or the Druids who were persecuted by both Romans
and Christians the Rev. P. Roberts, author of "Collectana Cambrica,"
observes that they used these means to preserve themselves and their
families, and whilst the country was thinly peopled, and thickly
wooded did so successfully, and perhaps to a much later period than
is imagined.

There are dwelling at the present day on the river-banks of the
Congo, in Africa, tribes of dwarfs, whose existence, until Sir Harry
Johnston's recent discovery had been regarded as a myth; though they
must have lived there from time immemorial.

They exist in caves, and in their ways recall the
fairies. "Undoubtedly," says Sir Harry, "to my thinking, most fairy
myths arose from the contemplation of the mysterious habits of dwarf
troglodite races lingering on still in the crannies, caverns, forests
and mountains of Europe, after the invasion of neolithic man."


