FAIRY DRESS, DWELLING, ETC.

The Fairies were small handsome creatures in human form; very kind
to, and often showered benefits on those who treated them kindly, but
most revengeful towards those who dared to treat them badly. They were
dressed in green, and very often in white, and some of their maidens
were so beautiful, that young men sometimes would fall over head and
ears in love with them, especially whilst watching them dancing on
a moonlight night; for the old belief was concerning the Fairies,
that on moonlight nights they were wont to join hands, and form into
circles, and dance and sing with might and main until the cock crew,
then they would vanish.

The circles in the grass of green fields are still called "Cylchau
y Tylwyth Teg" (Fairy Rings). These circles were numerous in Wales
when I was a boy; and it was believed by many about forty years ago,
if not later that some misfortune would befall any person entering
these circles, for I well remember being warned to keep away from
them. At the present time, however, I do not know of any person who is
afraid of entering them; so it seems that the superstition respecting
the Fairy Rings has entirely died out during the last generation.

As to their dwellings, the Fairies were "things under the earth," for
they were generally supposed to dwell in the lower regions, especially
beneath lakes, where their country towns and castles were situated;
and the people on the coasts of Pembrokeshire  imagined that they
inhabited certain enchanted green isles of the sea.

The green meadows of the sea, called in the old Welsh Triads Gwerddonau
Llion, are the:


   "Green fairy islands, reposing,
    In sunlight and beauty on ocean's calm breast."


A British King in ancient times, whose name was Garvan is said to have
sailed away in search of these islands, and never returned. Garvan's
voyage is commemorated in the Triads as one of the "Three Losses by
Disappearance." Southey after citing Dr. W. O. Pughe's article in the
"Cambrian Biography," goes on as follows:--

"Of these Islands, or Green Spots of the Floods, there are some
singular superstitions. They are the abode of the Tylwyth Teg, or the
fair family, the souls of the virtuous Druids, who not having been
Christians, cannot enter the Christian Heaven, but enjoy this heaven
of their own. They, however, discover a love of mischief, neither
becoming happy spirits, nor consistent with their original character;
for they love to visit the earth, and seizing a man, inquire whether
he will travel above wind, mid-wind, or below wind; above wind is
a giddy and terrible passage, below wind is through bush and brake,
the middle is a safe course. But the spell of security is, to catch
hold of the grass. In their better moods they come over and carry
the Welsh in their boats. He who visits these islands imagines on
his return that he has been absent only a few hours, when, in truth,
whole centuries have past away. If you take a turf from St. David's
Churchyard, and stand upon it on the sea shore, you behold these
Islands. A man once who thus obtained sight of them, immediately put
to sea to find them; but his search was in vain. He returned, looked
at them again from the enchanted turf, again set sail, and failed
again. The third time he took the turf into his vessel, and stood upon
it till he reached them." Wirt Sikes, in his "British Goblins," page 8,
says that there are sailors on the romantic coasts of Pembrokeshire,
and southern Carmarthenshire who still talk of the green meadows of
enchantment, which are visible sometimes to the eyes of mortals, but
only for a brief space, and they suddenly vanish. He also adds that
there are traditions of sailors who, in the early part of the 19th
century, actually went ashore on the fairy islands--not knowing that
they were such, until they returned to their boats, when they were
filled with awe at seeing the islands disappear from their sight,
neither sinking in the sea, nor floating away upon the waters, but
simply vanishing suddenly. In the account I have just given, a turf
from St. David's Churchyard to stand upon enabled one to behold the
enchanted lands of the Fairies; but according to traditions in other
parts of the country, it seems that a certain spot in Cemmes was the
requisite platform, to see these mythical beings who were known in
some parts as Plant Rhys Ddwfn (Children of Rhys the Deep).

In the Brython, Vol. I., page 130, Gwynionydd says as follows:--

"There is a tale current in Dyfed, that there is, or rather that
there has been a country between Cemmes, the Northern Hundred of
Pembrokeshire, and Aberdaron in Lleyn. The chief patriarch of the
inhabitants was Rhys Ddwfn, and his descendants used to be called
after him the Children of Rhys Ddwfn.

"They were, it is said, a handsome race enough, but remarkably small
in size. It is stated that certain herbs of a strange nature grew in
their land, so that they were able to keep their country from being
seen by even the most sharp-sighted invaders.

"There is no account that these remarkable herbs grew in any other
part of the world, excepting on a small spot, a square yard in area
in a certain part of Cemmes. If it chanced that a man stood alone
on it, he beheld the whole of the territory of Plant Rhys Ddwfn;
but the moment he moved he would lose sight of it altogether, and it
would have been nearly vain to look for his footprints."


