LADY OF LLYN Y VAN VACH IN CARMARTHENSHIRE.

Several versions have appeared from time to time of this story,
but the most complete one is the one which appeared in Mr. Rees, of
Tonn, in his interesting introduction to "The Physicians of Myddvai,"
published by the Welsh Manuscript Society, at Llandovery, in 1861;
and this is also the version which was reproduced by Principal Sir
J. Rhys, of Oxford, in his great work on Celtic Folk-lore.

About five years ago, I came across several old persons in the parish
of Myddvai, who could repeat portions of the story, but nothing new,
so I give the version of Mr. Rees of Tonn, which is as follows:--

"When the eventful struggle made by the Princes of South Wales to
preserve the independency of their country was drawing to its close
in the twelfth century, there lived at Blaensawdde, near Llandeusant,
Carmarthenshire, a widowed woman, the relict of a farmer who had fallen
in those disastrous troubles. The widow had an only son to bring up,
but Providence smiled upon her, and despite her forlorn condition,
her live stock had so increased in course of time, that she could
not well depasture them upon her farm, so she sent a portion of her
cattle to graze on the adjoining Black Mountain, and their most
favourite place was near the small lake called Llyn y Fan Fach,
on the north-western side of the Carmarthenshire Fans.

The son grew up to manhood, and was generally sent by his mother to
look after the cattle on the mountain. One day, in his peregrinations
along the margin of the lake, to his great astonishment, he beheld
sitting on the unruffled surface of the water, a lady, one of the most
beautiful creatures that mortal eyes ever beheld, her hair flowed
gracefully in ringlets over her shoulders, the tresses of which
she arranged with a comb, whilst the glassy surface of her watery
couch served for the purpose of a mirror, reflecting back her own
image. Suddenly she beheld the young man standing on the brink of
the lake, with his eyes riveted on her, and unconsciously offering
to herself the provision of barley bread and cheese with which he
had been provided when he left his home.

"Bewildered by a feeling of love and admiration for the object
before him, he continued to hold out his hand towards the lady, who
imperceptibly glided near to him, but gently refused the offer of
his provisions. He attempted to touch her, but she eluded his grasp,
saying:--


   "Cras dy fara;
    Nid hawdd fy nala.

    Hard baked is thy bread!
    'Tis not easy to catch me."


and immediately dived under the water and disappeared, leaving the
love-stricken youth to return home, a prey to disappointment and
regret that he had been unable to make further acquaintance with one,
in comparison with whom the whole of the fair maidens of Llanddeusant
and Myddfai whom he had ever seen were as nothing.

"On his return home, the young man communicated to his mother the
extraordinary vision he had beheld. She advised him to take some
unbaked dough or "toes" the next time in his pocket, as there must
have been some spell connected with the hard-baked bread, or "Bara
cras," which prevented his catching the lady.

"Next morning, before the sun had gilded with its rays the peaks of
the Fans, the young man was at the lake, not for the purpose of looking
after his mother's cattle, but seeking for the same enchanting vision
he had witnessed the day before; but all in vain did he anxiously
strain his eyeballs and glance over the surface of the lake, as only
the ripples occasioned by a stiff breeze met his view, and a cloud
hung heavily on the summits of the Fan, which imparted an additional
gloom to his already distracted mind.

Hours passed on, the wind was hushed, and the clouds which had
enveloped the mountain had vanished into thin air before the powerful
beams of the sun, when the youth was startled by seeing some of his
mother's cattle on the precipitous side of the acclivity, nearly on the
opposite side of the lake. His duty impelled him to attempt to rescue
them from their perilous position, for which purpose he was hastening
away, when to his inexpressible delight, the object of his search again
appeared to him as before, and seemed much more beautiful than when he
first beheld her. His hand was again held out to her, full of unbaked
bread, which he offered with an urgent proffer of his heart also, and
vows of eternal attachment. All of which were refused by her saying:--


   "Llaith dy fara,
    Ti ni fynna'."

    (Unbaked is thy bread!
    I will not have thee.)


But the smiles that played upon her features as the lady vanished
beneath the waters raised within the young man a hope that forbade
him to despair by her refusal of him, and the recollection of which
cheered him on his way home. His aged parent was made acquainted
with his ill-success, and she suggested that his bread should next
time be but slightly baked, as most likely to please the mysterious
being of whom he had become enamoured.

"Impelled by an irresistible feeling, the youth left his mother's
house early next morning, and with rapid steps he passed over the
mountain. He was soon near the margin of the lake, and with all the
impatience of an ardent lover did he wait with a feverish anxiety
for the reappearance of the mysterious lady.

"The sheep and goats browsed on the precipitous sides of the Fan;
the cattle strayed amongst the rocks and large stones, some of which
were occasionally loosened from their beds and suddenly rolled down
into the lake; rain and sunshine alike came and passed away; but all
were unheeded by the youth, so wrapped up was he in looking for the
appearance of the lady.

"The freshness of the early morning had disappeared before the sultry
rays of the noon-day sun, which in its turn was fast verging towards
the west as the evening was dying away and making room for the shades
of night, and hope had well nigh abated of beholding once more the
Lady of the Lake. The young man cast a sad and last farewell look
over the water, and to his astonishment, beheld several cows walking
along its surface. The sight of these animals caused hope to revive
that they would be followed by another object far more pleasing; nor
was he disappointed, for the maiden reappeared, and to his enraptured
sight, even lovelier than ever. She approached the land, and he rushed
to meet her in the water. A smile encouraged him to seize her hand;
neither did she refuse the moderately baked bread he offered her; and
after some persuasion she consented to become his bride, on condition
that they should only live together until she received from him three
blows without a cause,


    "Tri ergyd diachos."
    (Three causeless blows.)


and if he ever should happen to strike her three such blows she would
leave him for ever. To such conditions he readily consented and would
have consented to any other stipulation, had it been proposed, as he
was only intent on then securing such a lovely creature for his wife.

"Thus the Lady of the Lake engaged to become the young man's wife,
and having loosened her hand for a moment she darted away and dived
into the lake. His chagrin and grief were such that he determined
to cast himself headlong into the deepest water, so as to end his
life in the element that had contained in its unfathomed depths the
only one for whom he cared to live on earth. As he was on the point
of committing this rash act, there emerged out of the lake two most
beautiful ladies, accompanied by a hoary-headed man of noble mien
and extraordinary stature, but having otherwise all the force and
strength of youth. This man addressed the almost bewildered youth in
accents calculated to soothe his troubled mind, saying that as he
proposed to marry one of his daughters, he consented to the union,
provided the young man could distinguish which of the two ladies
before him was the object of his affections. This was no easy task,
as the maidens were such perfect counterparts of each other that it
seemed quite impossible for him to choose his bride, and if perchance
he fixed upon the wrong one all would be for ever lost.

"Whilst the young man narrowly scanned the two ladies, he could not
perceive the least difference betwixt the two, and was almost giving
up the task in despair, when one of them thrust her foot a slight
degree forward. The motion, simple as it was, did not escape the
observation of the youth, and he discovered a trifling variation in
the mode with which their sandals were tied. This at once put an end
to the dilemma, for he, who had on previous occasions been so taken
up with the general appearance of the Lady of the Lake, had also
noticed the beauty of her feet and ankles, and on now recognising
the peculiarity of her shoe-tie he boldly took hold of her hand.

"'Thou hast chosen rightly,' said her father, 'be to her a kind and
faithful husband, and I will give her, as a dowry, as many sheep,
cattle, goats, and horses as she can count of each without heaving or
drawing in her breath. But remember, that if you prove unkind to her
at any time, and strike her three times without a cause, she shall
return to me, and shall bring all her stock back with her.'"

Such was the verbal marriage settlement, to which the young man gladly
assented, and his bride was desired to count the number of sheep she
was to have.

She immediately adopted the mode of counting by fives, thus:--one,
two, three, four, five--one, two, three, four, five; and as many times
as possible in rapid succession, till her breath was exhausted. The
same procession of reckoning had to determine the number of goat,
cattle, and horses respectively; and in an instant the full number
of each came out of the lake when called upon by the father.

"The young couple were then married, by what ceremony was not stated,
and afterwards went to reside at a farm called Esgair Llaethy,
somewhat more than a mile from the Village of Myddfai, where they
lived in prosperity and happiness for several years, and became the
parents of three sons, who were beautiful children.

"Once upon a time there was a christening to take place in the
neighbourhood, to which the parents were specially invited. When the
day arrived the wife appeared very reluctant to attend the christening,
alleging that the distance was too great for her to walk. Her husband
told her to fetch one of the horses which were grazing in an adjoining
field. 'I will,' said she, 'if you will bring me my gloves which
I left in our house.' He went to the house and returned with the
gloves, and finding that she had not gone for the horse jocularly
slapped her shoulder with one of them, saying, 'go! go!' (dos, dos),
when she reminded him of the understanding upon which she consented
to marry him:--That he was not to strike her without a cause; and
warned him to be more cautious for the future.

"On another occasion, when they were together at a wedding in the midst
of the mirth and hilarity of the assembled guests, who had gathered
together from all the surrounding country, she burst into tears and
sobbed most piteously. Her husband touched her on her shoulder and
inquired the cause of her weeping: she said, 'Now people are entering
into trouble, and your troubles are likely to commence, as you have
the second time stricken me without a cause.'

"Years passed on, and their children had grown up, and were
particularly clever young men. In the midst of so many worldly
blessings at home, the husband almost forgot that there remained
only one causeless blow to be given to destroy the whole of his
prosperity. Still he was watchful lest any trivial occurrence should
take place which his wife must regard as a breach of their marriage
contract. She told him, as her affection for him was unabated, to be
careful that he would not, through some inadvertence, give the last
and only blow, which, by an unalterable destiny over which she had
no control, would separate them for ever.

"It, however, so happened that one day they were together at a funeral,
where, in the midst of the mourning and grief at the house of the
deceased, she appeared in the highest and gayest spirits, and indulged
in immoderate fits of laughter, which so shocked her husband that
he touched her, saying: 'Hush! hush! don't laugh.' She said that she
laughed 'because people when they die go out of trouble,' and rising
up she went out of the house, saying, 'The last blow has been struck,
our marriage contract is broken, and at an end! Farewell!' Then she
started off towards Esgair Llaethdy, where she called her cattle and
other stock together, each by name. The cattle she called thus:--


    Mu wlfrech,
    Mu olfrech, gwynfrech,
    Pedair cae tonn-frech,
    Yr hen wynebwen.
    A'r las Geigen,
    Gyda'r Tarw gwyn
    O lys y Brenin;
    A'r llo du bach,
    Sydd ar y bach,
    Dere dithe, yn iach adre!

    Brindled cow, white speckled,
    Spotted cow, bold freckled,
    The four field sward mottled,
    The old white-faced,
    And the grey Geigen,
    With the white Bull,
    From the court of the King;
    And the little black calf
    Tho' suspended on the hook,
    Come thou also, quite well home."


They all immediately obeyed the summons of their mistress. The
'little black calf,' although it had been slaughtered, became alive
again, and walked off with the rest of the stock at the command of
the lady. This happened in the spring of the year, and there were
from four oxen ploughing in one of the fields; to these she cried:--


      "Pedwar eidion glas sydd ar y maes,
    Deuwch chwithau yn iach adre!

    The four grey oxen, that are on the field,
      Come you also quite well home!"


Away the whole of the live stock went with the Lady across Myddfai
Mountain, towards the lake from whence they came, a distance of above
six miles, where they disappeared beneath its waters, leaving no trace
behind except a well-marked furrow, which was made by the plough the
oxen drew after them into the lake, and which remains to this day as
a testimony to the truth of this story.

"What became of the affrighted ploughman--whether he was left on the
field when the oxen set off, or whether he followed them to the lake,
has not been handed down to tradition; neither has the fate of the
disconsolate and half-ruined husband been kept in remembrance. But of
the sons it is stated that they often wandered about the lake and its
vicinity, hoping that their mother might be permitted to visit the face
of the earth once more, as they had been apprised of her mysterious
origin, her first appearance to their father, and the untoward
circumstances which so unhappily deprived them of her maternal care.

"In one of their rambles, at a place near Dol Howel, at the Mountain
Gate, still called 'Llidiad y Meddygon,' (The Physician's Gate), the
mother appeared suddenly, and accosted her eldest son, whose name
was Rhiwallon, and told him that his mission on earth was to be a
benefactor to mankind by relieving them from pain and misery, through
healing all manner of their diseases; for which purpose she furnished
him with a bag full of medical prescriptions and instructions for the
preservation of health. That by strict attention thereto he and his
family would become for many generations the most skilful physicians
in the country. Then, promising to meet him when her counsel was most
needed, she vanished. But on several occasions she met her sons near
the banks of the lake, and once she even accompanied them on their
return home as far as a place still called 'Pant-y-Meddygon,' (The
dingle of the Physicians) where she pointed out to them the various
plants and herbs which grew in the dingle, and revealed to them
their medicinal qualities or virtues; and the knowledge she imparted
to them, together with their unrivalled skill, soon caused them to
attain such celebrity that none ever possessed before them. And in
order that their knowledge should not be lost, they wisely committed
the same to writing for the benefit of mankind throughout all ages.

And so ends the story of the Physicians of Myddfai, which had been
handed down from one generation to another, thus:--


   "Yr hen wr llwyd o'r cornel,
    Gan ei dad a glywodd chwedel,
    A chan ei dad fy glywodd yntau,
    Ac ar ei ol mi gofiais innau."

   "The grey old man in the corner
    Of his father heard a story,
    Which from his father he had heard,
    And after them I have remembered."


The Physicians of Myddfai were Rhiwallon and his sons, Cadwgan,
Gruffydd and Einion, who became Physicians to Rhys Gryg, Lord of
Llandovery and Dynefor Castles, who lived in the early part of the
thirteenth century. Rhys "gave them rank, lands, and privileges at
Myddfai for their maintenance in the practice of their art and science,
and the healing and benefit of those who should seek their help."

The fame of the celebrated Physicians was soon established over the
whole country, and continued for centuries among their descendants;
and the celebrated Welsh Poet Dafydd ap Gwilym, who flourished in
the fourteenth century, says in one of his poems when alluding to
these physicians:--


   "Meddyg, nis gwnai modd y gwnaeth
    Myddfai, o chai ddyn meddfaeth."

    (A Physician he would not make
    As Myddfai made, if he had a mead fostered man.)


Mr. Rees says that "of the above lands bestowed upon the Meddygon,
there are two farms in the Myddfai parish still called "Llwyn Ifan
Feddyg," the Grove of Evan, the Physician, and "Llwyn Meredydd Feddyg"
(the Grove of Meredydd the Physician). Esgair Llaethdy, mentioned
in the foregoing legend, was formerly in the possession of the
above descendants, and so was Ty-newydd, near Myddfai, which was
purchased by Mr. Holford, of Cilgwyn, from the Rev. Charles Lloyd,
vicar of Llandefalle, Breconshire, who married a daughter of one of
the Meddygon, and had the living of Llandefalle from a Mr. Vaughan,
who presented him to the same out of gratitude, because Mr. Lloyd,
wife's father had cured him of a disease in the eye. As Mr. Lloyd
succeeded to the above living in 1748, and died in 1800, it is
probable that that skilful oculist was John Jones, who is mentioned
in the following inscription on a tombstone at present fixed against
the west end of Myddfai


                                  HERE
        Lieth the body of Mr. David Jones, of Mothvey, Surgeon,
             who was an honest, charitable and skilful man,
            He died September 14th, Anno Dom. 1719, aged 61.

                          JOHN JONES, SURGEON,

       Eldest son of the said David Jones, departed this life the
          25th of November, 1739, in the 4th year of his Age,
                   and also lyes interred hereunder.


These appear to have been the last of the Physicians who practised at
Myddfai. The above John Jones resided for some time at Llandovery,
and was a very eminent surgeon. One of his descendants, named John
Lewis, lived at Cwmbran, Myddfai, at which place his great-grandson,
Mr. John Jones, now resides.

"Dr. Morgan Owen, Bishop of Llandaff, who died at Glasallt, parish of
Myddfai, in 1645, was a descendant of the Meddygon, and an inheritor
of much of their landed property in that parish, the bulk of which
he bequeathed to his nephew, Morgan Owen, who died in 1667, and was
succeeded by his son Henry Owen; and at the decease of the last
of whose descendants, Roberts Lewis, Esqr., the estates became,
through the will of one of the family, the property of the late
D. A. S. Davies, Esqr., M.P., for Carmarthenshire.

"Bishop Owen bequeathed to another nephew, Morgan ap Rees, son of
Rees ap John, a descendant of the Meddygon, the farm of Rhyblid,
and some other property.

"Amongst other families who claim descent from the Physicians were
the Bowens of Cwmydw, Myddfai, and Jones of Dollgarreg and Penrhock,
in the same parish; the latter of whom are represented by Charles
Bishop, of Dollgarreg, Esqr., Clerk of the Peace for Carmarthenshire,
and Thomas Bishop, of Brecon, Esqr.

"Rees Williams, of Myddfai, is recorded as one of the Meddygon. His
great grandson was the late Rice Williams, M.D., of Aberystwyth,
who died May l6th, 1842, aged 85, and appears to have been the last,
although not the least eminent of the Physicians descended from the
mysterious Lady of Llyn y Fan."

Sir John Rhys mentions of another Dr. Williams also a descendant of
the Lady of Llyn y Fan, who was living at Aberystwyth in 1881.

It seems that there are several families in different parts of
Wales who are said to have fairy blood coursing through their veins;
and the noble Lady Bulkeley, who lived in North Wales, three or four
generations was supposed to be descended from a Fairy lady who married
a mortal.

There is also a tradition that after the disappearance of the lady
the disconsolate husband and his friends set to work to drain the
lake in order to get at her, if possible; but as they were making
a cutting into the bank a huge monster emerged from the water and
threatened to drown the town of Brecon for disturbing him, saying:--


   "Os na cha'i lonydd yn fy lle
    Mi fodda, dre Byrhonddu!"

    (If I get no quiet in my place
    I shall drown the town of Brecon).


so they had to give up draining the lake.

There are extant several versions of the Myddfai Legend. In the
"Cambro Briton" Vol. II., pages 313-315, we have a version in which
it is stated that the farmer used to go near the lake and see some
lambs he had bought at a fair, and that wherever he so went three
most beautiful maidens appeared to him from the lake. But whenever
he tried to catch them they ran away into the lake, saying:--


   "Cras dy fara,
    Anhawdd ein dala."

    (For thee who eatest baked bread
    It is difficult to catch us.)


But one day a piece of moist bread came floating ashore, which
he ate, and the next day he had a chat with the maidens. After a
little conversation he proposed marriage to one of them, to which
she consented, provided he could distinguish her from her sisters
the day after. Then the story goes on very similar to Mr. Rees'
version which I have already given in full.

In another beautiful version of the story which is given by Sikes in
his "British Goblins," it is said that an enamoured farmer had heard
of the lake maiden, who rowed up and down the lake in a golden boat,
with a golden oar. Her hair was long and yellow, and her face was
pale and melancholy. In his desire to see this wondrous beauty, the
farmer went on New Year's Eve to the edge of the lake and in silence,
awaited the coming of the first hour of the new year. It came, and
there in truth was the maiden in her golden boat, rowing softly to and
fro. Fascinated, he stood for hours beholding her, until the stars
faded out of the sky, the moon sank behind the rocks, and the cold
gray dawn drew nigh; and then the maiden began to vanish from his
sight. Wild with passion, he cried aloud to the retreating vision,
"Stay! Stay! Be my wife." But the maiden only uttered a faint cry,
and was gone. Night after night the young farmer haunted the shores
of the lake, but the maiden returned no more. He became negligent
of his person; his once robust form grew thin and wan; his face
was a map of melancholy and despair. He went one day to consult
a soothsayer who dwelt on the mountain, and this grave personage
advised him to besiege the damsel's heart with gifts of bread and
cheese. This counsel commending itself strongly to his Welsh way of
thinking, the former set out upon an assiduous course of casting his
bread upon the waters--accompanied by cheese. He began on Mid-summer
Eve by going to the lake and dropping therein a large cheese and a
loaf of bread. Night after night he continued to throw in loaves and
cheeses, but nothing appeared in answer to his sacrifices. His hopes
were set, however, on the approaching New Year's Eve. The momentous
night arrived at last. Clad in his best array, and armed with seven
white loaves and his biggest and handsomest cheese, he set out once
more for the lake. Then he waited till mid-night, and then slowly
and solemnly dropped the seven loaves into the water, and with a
sigh sent the cheese to keep them company. His persistence was at
length rewarded. The Lake Lady came in her skiff to where he was,
and gracefully stepped ashore. The story then proceeds as in the
other versions.

It was once a custom for people to go up to the lake on the first
Sunday in August, when its water was supposed to be boiling; and
Bishop Edwards, of St. Asaph, informed Professor Sir J. Rhys, that
"an old woman from Myddfai, who is now, that is to say in January,
1881, about eighty years of age, tells me that she remembers thousands
and thousands of people visiting the Lake of Little Fan on the first
Sunday or Monday in August, and when she was young she often heard
old men declare that at that time a commotion took place in the lake,
and that its waters boiled, which was taken to herald the approach
of the Lake Lady and her oxen."--Celtic Folk Lore--page 15.


