A STUDENT WHO HAD FAILED TO PASS HIS EXAMINATIONS TAUGHT BY THE
FAIRIES.

Mr. John Jones, of Pontrhydfendigaid, an old man of over 95 years of
age, related to me the following story about seven years ago:--

In the 18th century there was a certain clergyman in North
Cardiganshire, who was supposed to have been educated by the Fairies.

When he was a boy, his parents were very ambitious to see their son a
clergyman, but, unfortunately, the lad either neglected his studies,
or was a regular "blockhead," and always failed to pass his college
examinations, to the great regret and disappointment of his father
and mother. One day, however, when the boy was roaming about the
country (near the banks of the river Rheidol, as far as Mr. Jones
could remember the story), he suddenly met three boys, or rather
three little men who were not bigger than boys, who took him into
some cave and led him along a subterranean passage into the land
of the Fairies. The Fairies proved very kind to him, and when they
heard his story, they undertook to help him to learn his lessons,
so that in course of time he acquired a considerable knowledge of
the classics. After spending a certain number of years very happily
in Fairy Land, the young man returned to the world of mortals, and
to the great joy of his parents passed his examinations now without
the least difficulty, and in due time was ordained by the bishop, and
became a vicar of a parish north of Aberystwyth, either Llanfihangel,
Llancynfelin, or Eglwysfach.

This tale seems to be a version of the Story of Elidorus, which
Giraldus Cambrensis heard in the neighbourhood of Swansea during his
"Itinerary through Wales," with Archbishop Baldwin in the year 1188,
which is as follows:--

"A short time before our days, a circumstance worthy of note occurred
in these parts, which Elidorus, a priest, most strenuously affirmed
had befallen himself. When a youth of twelve years, and learning his
letters, since, as Solomon says, "The root of learning is bitter,
although the fruit is sweet," in order to avoid the discipline and
frequent stripes inflicted on him by his perceptor, he ran away, and
concealed himself under the hollow bank of a river. After fasting
in that situation for two days, two little men of pigmy stature
appeared to him, saying, 'If you come with us, we will lead you into
a country full of delights and sports.' "Assenting, and rising up, he
followed his guides through a path, at first subterraneous and dark,
into a most beautiful country, adorned with rivers and meadows, woods
and plains, but obscure, and not illuminated with the full light of
the sun." All the days were cloudy, and the nights extremely dark,
on account of the absence of the moon and stars. The boy was brought
before the King, and introduced to him in the presence of the court;
who, having examined him for a long time, delivered him to his
son, who was then a, boy. "These men were of the smallest stature,
but very well proportioned in their make; they were all of a fair
complexion, with luxuriant hair falling over their shoulders like that
of women. "They had horses and greyhounds adapted to their size. "They
neither ate flesh nor fish, but lived on milk diet, made up into messes
with saffron. "They never took an oath, for they detested nothing so
much as lies. "As often as they returned from our upper hemisphere,
they reprobated our ambition, infidelities, and inconstances; they
had no form of public worship, being strict lovers and reverers, as
it seemed, of truth. "The boy frequently returned to our hemisphere,
sometimes by the way he had first gone, sometimes by another; at first
in company with other persons, and afterwards alone, and made himself
known only to his mother, declaring to her the manners, nature and
state of that people. "Being desired by her to bring a present of
gold, with which that region abounded, he stole, while at play with
the King's son, the golden ball with which he used to divert himself,
and brought it to his mother in great haste; and when he reached the
door of his father's house, but not unpursued, and was entering it in
a great hurry, his foot stumbled on the threshold, and falling down
into the room where his mother was sitting, the two pigmies seized
the ball which had dropped from his hand, and departed, showing the
boy every mark of contempt and derision. "On recovering from his fall,
confounded with shame, and execrating the evil counsel of his mother,
he returned by the usual track to the subterraneous road, but found no
appearance of any passage, though he searched for it on the banks of
the river for nearly the space of a year. "But since those calamities
are often alleviated by time, which reason cannot mitigate, and length
of time alone blunts the edge of our afflictions, and puts an end
to many evils, the youth having been brought back by his friends and
mother, and restored to his right way of thinking, and to his learning,
in process of time attained the rank of priesthood. "Whenever David
II., bishop of St. David's, talked to him in his advanced state of
life concerning this event, he could never relate the particulars
without shedding tears. "He had made himself acquainted with the
language of that nation, the words of which, in his younger days he
used to recite, which, as the bishop often had informed me, were very
conformable to the Greek idiom. "When they asked for water, they said
'ydor ydorum,' which meant bring water, for 'ydor' in their language,
as well as in Greek, signifies water, from whence vessels for water
are caller 'udriai'; and 'Dur' (dwr) also, in the British language
(Welsh) signifies water.

"When they wanted salt they said, 'Halgein ydorum,' bring salt: salt
is called 'al' in Greek, and 'halen' in British, for that language,
from the length of time which the Britons (then called Trojans, and
afterwards Britons, from Brito, their leader), remained in Greece
after the destruction of Troy, became in many instances, similar
to the Greek.... "If a scrupulous inquirer asks my opinion of the
relation here inserted, I answer with Augustine, 'that the Divine
miracles are to be admired, not discussed.' "Nor do I, by denial,
place bounds to the Divine Power, nor, by assent, insolently extend
what cannot be extended. "But I always call to mind the saying
of St. Jerome: 'You will find,' says he, 'Many things incredible
and improbable, which nevertheless are true; for nature cannot in
any respect prevail against the Lord of nature.' "These things,
therefore, and similar contingencies, I should place, according to
the opinion of Augustine, among those particulars which are neither
to be affirmed, nor too positively denied." The above account is of
the greatest interest, as it was written 700 years ago, and it also
gives the opinion of one who lived in those days, of "these things,
and similar contingencies." It is possible that many of the Fairy
Tales throughout the Kingdom, if not throughout the whole of Europe,
have been founded on the story of Elidorus, the priest.


