A FARM SERVANT NEAR TREGARON, WHO SPENT A YEAR AND A DAY WITH THE
FAIRIES.

The following story appeared in "Cymru" for May, 1893, a Welsh
Magazine, edited by Owen M. Edwards, M.A. It was written in Welsh by
the late eminent Folk-Lorist, Mr. D. Lledrod Davies, and I translate
it:--

The farm-house called "Allt Ddu," is situated about half-way between
Pont Rhyd Fendigaid and Tregaron.

It is said that two servant men went out of the house one evening in
search for the cattle, which had gone astray. One of the men proceeded
in one direction and the other in another way, so as to be more sure
of finding the animals.

But after wandering about for hours, one of the two servants came home,
but whether he found the cattle or not it is not stated. However,
he reached home safely; but the other man, his fellow-servant, came
not, and after anxiously expecting him till a late hour of night, he
began to feel very uneasy concerning his safety, fearing that the lad
had accidentally fallen into some of the pits of the Gors Goch. Next
morning came, but the servant came not home; and in vain did they long
to hear the sound of his footsteps approaching the house as before.

Then inquiries were made about him, and people went to try and find
him, but all in vain. Days past and even weeks without hearing anything
about him, till at last his relations began to suspect that his fellow
servant had murdered him during the night they were out looking for
the cattle. So the servant was summoned before a Court of Justice,
and accused of having murdered his fellow-servant on a certain night;
but the young man, pleaded not guilty in a most decided manner, and
as no witness could be found against him, the case was dismissed;
but many people were still very suspicious of him, and the loss of his
fellow servant continued to be a black spot on his character. However,
it was decided at last to go to the "dyn hysbys," (a wise man, or a
conjurer)--a man of great repute in former days,--to consult with him,
and to set the case before him exactly as it had happened. After going
and explaining everything to the conjurer concerning the lost servant,
he informed them that the young man was still alive.

He then told them to go to a certain place at the same time of night,
one year and a day from the time the man was lost, and that they
should then and there see him. One year and a day at last passed away,
and at that hour the family, and especially the servant, traced their
steps to the particular spot pointed out by the conjuror, and there,
to their great surprise, whom should they see within the Fairy Circle,
dancing as merrily as any, but the lost servant. And now, according to
the directions which had been given by the conjurer, the other servant
took hold of the collar of the coat of the one who was dancing, and
dragged him out of the circle, saying to him--"Where hast thou been
lad?" But the lad's first words were, "Did you find the cattle?" for
he thought that he had been with the Fairies only for a few minutes.

Then he explained how he entered the Fairy Circle, and how he was
seized by them, but found their company so delightful that he thought
he had been with them only for a few minutes.


