TAFFY AP SION OF PENCADER AMONG THE FAIRIES.

The following Fairy Legend appeared in "British Goblins," page 75:--

Taffy ap Sion, the shoemaker's son, living near Pencader,
Carmarthenshire, was a lad who many years ago entered the Fairy circle
on the mountain hard by there, and having danced a few minutes as
he supposed, chanced to step out. He was then astonished to find
that the scene which had been so familiar was now quite strange to
him. Here were roads and houses he had never seen, and in place of his
father's humble cottage there now stood a fine stone farmhouse. About
him were lovely cultivated fields instead of the barren mountain he
was accustomed to.

'Ah,' thought he, 'this is some Fairy trick to deceive my eyes. It
is not ten minutes since I stepped into that circle, and now when
I step out they have built my father a new house! Well, I only hope
it is real; anyhow, I'll go and see.' So he started off by a path he
knew instinctively, and suddenly struck against a very solid hedge. He
rubbed his eyes, felt the hedge with his fingers, scratched his head,
felt the hedge again, ran a thorn into his fingers and cried out,
'Wbwb' this is no Fairy hedge anyhow, nor, from the age of the thorns,
was it grown in a few minutes' time! So he climbed over it and walked
on. 'Here was I born,' said he, as he entered the farmyard, staring
wildly about him, 'and not a thing here do I know!' His mystification
was complete, when there came bounding towards him a huge dog, barking
furiously. 'What dog is this? Get out you ugly brute! Don't you
know I'm master here?--at least, when mother's from home, for father
don't count.' But the dog only barked the harder. 'Surely,' muttered
Taffy to himself, 'I have lost my road and am wandering through some
unknown neighbourhood; but no, yonder is the Careg Hir!' and he stood
staring at the well-known erect stone thus called, which still stands
on the mountain south of Pencader, and is supposed to have been placed
there in ancient times to commemorate a victory. As Taffy stood thus,
looking at the long stone, he heard footsteps behind him, and turning,
beheld the occupant of the farmhouse, who had come out to see why
his dog was barking.

Poor Taffy was so ragged and wan that the farmer's Welsh heart was at
once stirred to sympathy. 'Who are you, poor man?' he asked, to which
Taffy answered, 'I know who I was, but I do not know who I am now. I
was the son of a shoemaker who lived in this place, this morning;
for that rock, though it is changed a little, I know too well.' 'Poor
fellow,' said the farmer, 'You have lost your senses. This house was
built by my great-grandfather, repaired by my grandfather; and that
part there, which seems newly built, was done about three years ago
at my expense. You must be deranged, or you have missed the road; but
come in and refresh yourself with some victuals, and rest.' Taffy was
half persuaded that he had overslept himself and lost his road, but
looking back he saw the rock before mentioned, and exclaimed, 'It is
but an hour since I was on yonder rock robbing a hawk's nest.' 'Where
have you been since?' Taffy related his adventure. 'Ah,' quoth the
farmer, 'I see how it is--you have been with the Fairies. Pray who
was your father?' 'Sion Evan y Crydd o Glanrhyd,' was the answer. 'I
never heard of such a man,' said the farmer, shaking his head, 'nor
of such a place as Glanrhyd, either; but no matter, after you have
taken a little food we will step down to Catti Shon, at Pencader,
who will probably be able to tell something.' With this he beckoned
Taffy to follow him, and walked on; but hearing behind him the sound
of footsteps growing weaker and weaker, he turned round, when to his
horror he beheld the poor fellow crumble in an instant to about a
thimbleful of black ashes. The farmer, though much terrified at this
sight, preserved his calmness sufficiently to go at once and see old
Catti, the aged crone he had referred to, who lived at Pencader,
near by. He found her crouching over a fire of faggots, trying to
warm her old bones. 'And how do you do the day, Catti Shon?' asked
the farmer. 'Ah,' said old Catti, 'I'm wonderful well, farmer,
considering how old I am.' 'Yes, yes, you are very old. Now, since
you are so old, let me ask you--do you remember anything about Sion
y Crydd o Glanrhyd? Was there ever such a man, do you know?' 'Sion
Glanrhyd? O! I have a faint recollection of hearing my grandfather,
old Evan Shenkin, Penferdir, relate that Sion's son was lost one
morning, and they never heard of him afterwards, so that it was said
he was taken by the Fairies. His father's cottage stood somewhere near
your house.' 'Were there many Fairies about at that time?' asked the
farmer. 'O, yes; they were often seen on yonder hill, and I was told
they were lately seen in Pant Shon Shenkin, eating flummery out of
egg-shells, which they had stolen from a farm hard by.' 'Dir anwyl
fi!' cried the farmer; 'dear me! I recollect now--I saw them myself.'


