THE CARDIGANSHIRE PAINTER AND MUSICIAN, WHO PLAYED HIS FLUTE TO THE
FAIRY LADIES AND NEARLY SECURED ONE OF THEM AS A WIFE.

About the year 1860, a builder from Aberayron, in Cardiganshire, was
erecting a Vicarage at Nantcwnlle, about nine miles from Aberayron,
not far from Llangeitho. There was a certain man there employed as
a painter, whose name was John Davies, a harmless and superstitious
character, who once had been an exciseman, afterwards a carpenter, and
at last became a painter, though he did not shine in either of the two
trades. He was however, a brilliant musician, and belonged to a musical
family. He was acquainted with the works of Handel, Mozart, Haydn, and
Beethoven, whilst one of his favourites was the song of the Witches
in "Macbeth," He also always carried his flute in his pocket. Whilst
this Nantcwnlle Vicarage was in course of construction, John was
sent one day on a message to Aberayron. He went there in due time,
and in the afternoon left the town and started on his return journey,
having the choice of two roads--either returning through the Vale of
Aeron, or across the hill--country of Cilcennin, The latter was a very
lonely route, but he chose it as it was about two miles shorter. So
John hurried on his journey so as to reach his destination before
night. When he came to the little village of Cilcennin, he had a good
mind to enter the public house known as the "Commercial," to see his
old friend Llywelyn, when he remembered that it was getting late and
that he had to pass by the ghosts of the moors and the Fairy circles
on the top of the mountain. After walking on again about a mile, he
arrived at another public house, known as "Rhiwlas Arms." He was now
within three miles to the end of his journey, and it occurred to him
that it would be a splendid thing to have one pint of beer to give
him strength and courage to meet the ghosts. So in he went into the
Public House, where he met with many old friends, and drank more than
one pint. After taking out his flute from his pocket, John obliged
the merry company with many of the old Welsh airs, such as "Ar Hyd y
Nos," "Glan Meddwdod Mwyn," "Llwyn on," etc. It was 8 o'clock p.m.,
and in the middle of October. John started from the house, boasting
to those who were present that he was not afraid, but poor fellow, as
soon as he went out into the darkness and the stillness of the night,
his heart began to beat very fast. Nevertheless, he walked forward
from the cross-road towards Hendraws, and turned to a road which led
direct to Nantcwnlle. For a considerable distance, there was no hedge
except on one side of the road, and nothing but a vast open moor on
the other side. John knew that he was to pass a small cottage called
Ty-clottas, and expected every moment to see the light of the old woman
who lived there, who was known as Peggi Ty-clottas. Unfortunately,
John had somehow or other wandered away from the road into the bog;
but seeing light before him, he went on confidently. He followed the
light for some distance, but did not come to any house, and he noticed
that the light was travelling and giving a little jump now and again.



At the early dawn next morning, old Peggi Ty-clottas, when she was half
awake, heard some strange music, more strange than she had ever heard
before. At first she thought it was the "toili" (phantom funeral),
which had come to warn her of her approaching death; for to believe
in the "toili" was part of Peggi's confession of faith. But when she
listened attentively, Peggi found out that the music was not a dead
march, but rather something light and merry. So it could not have
been the "toili." Afterwards she thought it was the warbling of some
bird. Peggi had heard the lark many a time at the break of day singing
songs of praises to the Creator. She had also heard the lapwing and
other birds, breaking on the loneliness of her solitary home; but
never had she heard a bird like this one singing, singing continually
without a pause. At last she got up from her bed and went out into
the moor in order to see what was there. To her great surprise, she
saw a man sitting on a heap, and blowing into some instrument, who
took no notice of Peggi. Peggi went quite close to the man and asked
him in a loud voice, "What do you want here?" Then the man stirred up
and ceased to blow, and with an angry look, said,--"Ah you,--you have
spoiled everything; it nearly came to a bargain." It proved that the
man whom Peggi came upon was John Davies, the painter, who had been
playing his flute to the Fairies, and had almost made a bargain with
them to marry a Fairy lady, when old Peggi came to spoil everything.



When Mr. T. Compton Davies, heard about John among the Fairies he
went to him and begged him to tell him all about it; and he did
so. According to John's own account of his night adventure it was
something as follows:--When he got lost in the bog, he followed the
light, till presently, he came to a Fairy ring, where a large number
of little Fairy ladies danced in it, and to his great surprise, one
of them took his arm, so that John also began to dance. And after a
while, the Queen of the Fairies herself came on to him, and asked him,
"Where do you come from?" John replied, "From the world of mortals,"
and added that he was a painter. Then she said to him, that they had
no need of a painter in the world of Fairies, as there was nothing
getting old there. John found the Fairies all ladies, or at least
he did not mention any men. They were very beautiful, but small,
and wearing short white dresses coming down to the knees only. When
he took out from his pocket his flute and entertained them by playing
some Irish, Scotch, and English airs, the Queen informed him that they
(the Fairies) were of Welsh descent. Then John played some Welsh airs
from Owen Alaw to the great delight of the Fairy ladies, and they had
a merry time of it. John soon became a great favourite, and asked for
something to drink, but found they were "teetotals." Then he fell
in love with one of the Fairy ladies, and asked the Queen for the
hand of the maiden, and informed her that he had a horse named Bob,
as well as a cart of his own making. The Queen in reply said that they
were not accustomed to mix with mortals, but as he had proved himself
such a musician, she gave her consent under the conditions that he
and the little lady should come once a month on the full moon night
to the top of Mount Trichrug to visit the Fairies. Then the Queen took
hold of a pot full of gold which she intended giving John as a dowry,
but, unfortunately, at the very last moment, when he was just going
to take hold of it, old Peggi TyClottas came to shout and to spoil
the whole thing; for as soon as the Fairy ladies saw old Peggi,
they all vanished through some steps into the underground regions
and John never saw them again. But he continued to believe as long
as he lived that he had been with the Fairies.


