TWO MEN WHO SAW THE FAIRIES IN CARMARTHENSHIRE DANCING IN BROAD
DAYLIGHT.

Mr. Compton Davies, also informed me that there were two men in his
neighbourhood who had seen the Fairies about 45 years ago, and he
directed me to go and see them so as to hear everything from their
own lips. One of them, David Evans, Red Lion, lives at Aberayron,
and the other Evan Lewis is a farmer near Mydroilyn, in the parish of
Llanarth. I went to see both of them, and they gave me a full account
of what they had seen which was something as follows:--

In August, 1862, David Evans and Evan Lewis, went from the Coast
of Cardiganshire with their waggons all the way to Brecon for some
timber for ship-building, which was going on at New Quay. On their
return journey, through Carmarthenshire, they stopped for a short
time at a place called Cwmdwr on the road leading from Llanwrda to
Lampeter. It was about 2 o'clock in the afternoon, and the two men
and their horses and waggons were standing opposite a farm known as
Maestwynog, where the reapers were busy at work in a wheat-field close
by. As they were looking in the direction of a hillside not far off,
David Evans saw about fifty small wheat stacks (sopynau bychain), as
he at first thought. On second sight, however, he noticed that they
were moving about, he took them for reapers. They were all dressed
exactly alike, and walked fast one after another up the hillside
footpath. David Evans now called the attention of his companion Evan
Lewis, whom he asked who the men could have been; but before he had
time to make any further remarks, the first of those who were climbing
up along the winding footpath had reached a small level spot on the top
of the hill. The others quickly followed him, and each one in coming
to the top, gave a jump to dance, and they formed a circle. After
dancing for a short time, one of the dancers turned in into the middle
of the circle, followed by the others, one by one till they appeared
like a gimblet screw. Then they disappeared into the ground. After
awhile one of them reappeared again, and looked about him in every
direction as a rat, and the others followed him one by one and did
the same. Then they danced for some time as before, and vanished into
the ground as they had done the first time. The two men, David Evans
and Evan Lewis were watching them from a distance of about 400 yards
and were more than astonished to see men, as they thought, acting in
such a strange and curious manner on the hill. They continued looking
for some time but the dancers did not appear again. At last the two
men proceeded on their journey till they came to an old man working
on the road whom they asked whether he knew anything about the men
they had seen dancing in a circle on the hill behind Maestwynog. The
old man replied that he had not the least idea, but had heard his
grandfather say that the Tylwyth Teg (Fairies) used to dance in his
time, at which explanation our two friends smiled.

In the above account we see that the hill near Maestwynog was a special
haunt of the Fairies, even in modern days. There are certain spots
here and there all over Wales, pointed out by old people to this day,
as having been frequented in former times by the Fairies to dance
and to sing. An old man named James Jones, Golden Lion, Llanarth,
informed me that when a boy he heard from the lips of old men, many a
tale of Fairies seen on Bank-rhydeiniol; and that they were mounted
on horses, riding and playing; and the late Rev. J. Davies, Moria,
mentions that there were traditions of them appearing on Bannau Duon
in the same parish. In the northern part of Cardiganshire, the people
of Talybont showed me a spot a few miles to the east of that village,
where these supernatural beings appeared long ago, more especially to
dance. The neighbourhood of Aberporth, in the southern part of the
same county, was also a favourite spot according to an old woman in
the village. Pant Shon Shenkin in the neighbourhood of Pencader was
a famous place for Carmarthenshire Fairies, of which district we have
already given the reader more than one story.

Gwynionydd in the Brython for 1860, remarks that in former times the
Fairies were fond of the mountains of Dyfed, and that travellers in
Cardiganshire, between Lampeter and the town of Cardigan often saw
them on Llanwenog hill; but after arriving on that spot they would
be seen far away on the mountains of Llandyssul, and expecting to
find them there, they would be seen somewhere else, both deluding
and eluding the traveller.


