FAIRIES MARKETING.

It was formerly believed in some parts of West Wales, especially
by the people dwelling near the sea coast, that the Fairies visited
markets and fairs, and that their presence made business very brisk. I
have already referred to the "Gwerddonau Llion," or the enchanted
"Isles of the Sea," inhabited by Fairy Tribes. These Fairies, it was
believed, went to and fro between the islands and shore, through
a subterranean gallery under the bottom of the sea, and regularly
attended the markets at Milford Haven, in Pembrokeshire and Laugharne
in Carmarthenshire. ("British Goblins," page 10.) They made their
purchases without speaking, laid down their money and departed, always
leaving the exact sum required, which they seemed to know, without
asking the price of anything. Sometimes they were invisible, but they
were often seen by sharp-eyed persons. There was one special butcher
at Milford Haven upon whom the Fairies bestowed their patronage,
instead of distributing their favours indiscriminately.

According to Gwynionydd in the "Brython," for 1858, page 110, these
Fairies also came to market to Cardigan, and it was thought they raised
the prices of things terribly whenever they came there. In that part
of the country they were known as "Plant Rhys Ddwfn." No one saw them
coming there or going away, only seen there in the market. When prices
in the market happened to be high, and the corn all sold, however,
much there might have been there in the morning, the poor used to say
to one another on the way home, "Oh! They were there to-day," meaning
"Plant Rhys Ddwfn," or the Fairies. These Fairies were liked by the
farmers who had corn to sell, but disliked by the poor labourers who
had to buy corn and give higher price for it. Gwynionydd also says
that: "A certain Gruffydd Ap Einon was wont to sell them more corn
than anybody else, and that he was a great friend of theirs. He was
honoured by them beyond all his contemporaries by being led on a visit
to their home. As they were great traders, like the Phoenicians of old,
they had treasures from all countries under the sun. Gruffydd, after
feasting his eyes to satiety on their wonders was led back by them
loaded with presents. But before taking leave of them, he asked them
how they succeeded in keeping themselves safe from invaders, as one of
their number might become unfaithful, and go beyond the virtue of the
herbs that formed their safety. "Oh!" replied the little old man of
shrewd looks, "Just as Ireland has been blessed with a soil on which
venomous reptiles cannot live, so with our land; no traitor can live
here. Look at the sand on the seashore; perfect unity prevails there,
and so among us." Rhys, the father of our race, bade us even to the
most distant descendant to honour our parents and ancestors; love our
own wives without looking at those of our neighbours, and do our best
for our children and grandchildren. And he said that if we did so,
no one of us would prove unfaithful to another, or become what you
call a traitor. The latter is a wholly imaginary character among us;
strange pictures are drawn of him with his feet like those of an ass,
with a nest of snakes in his bosom, with a head like the Devil's, with
hands somewhat like a man's while one of them holds a large knife and
the family dead around him Good-bye!" When Gruffydd looked about him
he lost sight of the country of Plant Rhys, and found himself near
his home. He became very wealthy after this, and continued to be a
great friend of Plant Rhys as long as he lived. After Gruffydd's death
they came to the market again, but such was the greed of the farmers,
like Gruffydd before them, for riches, and so unreasonable were the
prices they asked for their corn, that the Rhysians took offence and
came no more to Cardigan to market. The old people used to think that
they now went to Fishguard market, as very strange people were wont
to be seen there."


