FAIRY CHANGELINGS.

Mr. B. Davies in the II. Vol. of the "Brython," page 182, gives the
following tale of a Fairy Changeling in the neighbourhood of Newcastle
Emlyn, in the Vale of Teifi, and on the borders of Carmarthenshire
and Cardiganshire:--

"One calm hot day, when the sun of heaven was brilliantly shining,
and the hay in the dales was being busily made by lads and lasses,
and by grown-up people of both sexes, a woman in the neighbourhood
of Emlyn placed her one-year-old infant in the "gader" or chair, as
the cradle is called in these parts, and out she went to the field
for a while, intending to return when her neighbour, an old woman
overtaken by the decrepitude of eighty summers, should call to her
that her Darling was crying. It was not long before she heard the old
woman calling to her; she ran hurriedly, and as soon as she set foot
on the kitchen floor, she took her little one in her arms as usual,
saying to him, "O my little one! thy mother's delight art thou! I
would not take the world for thee, etc." But to her surprise, he had
a very old look about him, and the more the tender-hearted mother
gazed at his face, the stranger it seemed to her, so that at last
she placed him in the cradle and told her sorrow to her relatives and
acquaintances. And after this one and the other had given his opinion,
it was agreed at last that it was one of Rhys Ddwfn's children that
was in the cradle, and not her dearly loved baby. In this distress
there was nothing to do but to fetch a wizard, or wise man, as fast
as the fastest horse could gallop. He said, when he saw the child
that he had seen his like before, and that it would be a hard job
to get rid of him, though not such a very hard job this time. The
shovel was made red hot in the fire by one of the Cefnarth (Cenarth)
boys, and held before the child's face; and in an instant the short
little old man took to his heels, and neither he nor his like was
seen afterwards from Abercuch to Aberbargod at any rate. The mother
found her darling unscathed the next moment. I remember also hearing
that the strange child was as old as the grandfather of the one that
had been lost."--"Celtic Folk-Lore" by Sir J. Rhys.

There are many such stories in different parts of Wales and Scotland,
and in both countries Fairies were believed to have a fatal admiration
for lovely children, and credited with stealing them, especially
unbaptized infants.

A Welsh poet thus sings:--


   "Llawer plentyn teg aeth ganddynt,
    Pan y cym'rynt helynt hir;
    Oddiar anwyl dda rieni,
    I drigfanau difri dir.


The Rev. Elias Owen's translation of the above is as follows:--


   "Many a lovely child they've taken,
    When long and bitter was the pain;
    From their parents, loving, dear,
    To the Fairies' dread domain."


Another popular mode of treatment resorted to in order to reclaim
children from the Fairies, and to get rid of ugly changelings was as
follows:--The mother was to carry the changeling to a river, and when
at the brink, the wizard who accompanied her was to cry out:--


    "Crap ar y wrach"--
    (A grip on the hag.)


and the mother was to respond:--


    "Rhy hwyr gyfraglach"--
    (Too late decrepit one);


Then the mother was to throw the changeling into the river, and then
returning home, where she would find her own child safe and sound.

It was believed that the Fairies were particularly busy in exchanging
children on St. John's Eve.


