FAIRY MOTHERS AND HUMAN MIDWIVES.

The following story is to be found in Welsh in an interesting
little book entitled "Ystraeon y Gwyll," by the late Mr. D. Lledrod
Davies; and in English by Sir John Rhys in his great work "Celtic
Folk-Lore":--The locality of the tale is Swyddffynon, near Ystrad
Meurig, in Cardiganshire.

"It used to be related by an old woman who died some thirty years
ago at the advanced age of about 100. She was Pali, mother of old
Rachel Evans, who died seven or eight years ago, when she was about
eighty. The latter was a curious character, who sometimes sang
"Maswedd," or rhymes of doubtful propriety, and used to take the
children of the village to see fairy rings. She also used to see the
"Tylwyth" (Fairies), and had many tales to tell of them. But her
mother, Pali, had actually been called to attend at the confinement
of one of them. The beginning of the tale is not very explicit; but,
anyhow, Pali one evening found herself face to face with the Fairy
lady she was to attend upon. She appeared to be the wife of one of
the princes of the country. She was held in great esteem, and lived
in a very grand palace. Everything there had been arranged in the
most beautiful and charming fashion. The wife was in her bed with
nothing about her but white, and she fared sumptuously. In due time,
when the baby had been born, the midwife had all the care connected
with dressing it and serving its mother. Pali could see or hear nobody
in the whole place, but the mother and the baby. She had no idea who
attended on them, or who prepared all the things they required, for
it was all done noiselessly and secretly. The mother was a charming
person, of an excellent temper and easy to manage. Morning and evening,
as she finished washing the baby, Pali had a certain ointment given
her to rub the baby with. She was charged not to touch it, but with
her hand, and especially not to put any near her eyes. This was
carried out for some time, but one day, as she was dressing the baby,
her eyes happened to itch, and she rubbed them with her hand. Then
at once she saw a great many wonders she had not before perceived;
and the whole place assumed a new aspect to her. She said nothing,
and in the course of the day she saw a great deal more. Among other
things, she observed small men and small women going in and out
following a variety of occupations. But their movements were as light
as the morning breezes. To move about was no trouble to them, and they
brought things into the room with the greatest quickness. They prepared
dainty food for the confined lady with the utmost order and skill,
and the air of kindness and affection with which they served her
was truly remarkable. In the evening, as she was dressing the baby,
the midwife said to the lady, "You have had a great many visitors
to-day." To this she replied, "How do you know that? Have you been
putting this ointment to your eyes?" Thereupon she jumped out of bed,
and blew into her eyes, saying, "Now you will see no more." She
never afterwards could see the fairies, however much she tried,
nor was the ointment entrusted to her after that day."

There is a version of this story located in the neighbourhood of
Llanuwchllyn, Merionethshire, and indeed in several other parts
of Wales.


