FAIRY KNOCKERS.

Knockers were supposed to be a species of Fairies which haunted the
mines, and underground regions, and whose province it was to indicate
by knocks and other sounds, the presence of rich veins of ore. That
miners in former times did really believe in the existence of such
beings is quite evident from the following two letters written by Lewis
Morris (great grandfather of Sir Lewis Morris the poet) in October
14th, 1754, and December 4th, 1754. They appeared in Bingley's North
Wales, Vol. II., pages 269-272:

"People who know very little of arts or sciences, or the powers of
nature (which, in other words are the powers of the author of nature),
will laugh at us Cardiganshire miners, who maintain the existence of
"Knockers" in mines, a kind of good-natured impalpable people not to
be seen, but heard, and who seem to us to work in the mines; that
is to say, they are the types or forerunners of working in mines,
as dreams are of some accidents, which happen to us. The barometer
falls before rain, or storms. If we do not know the construction of
it, we should call it a kind of dream that foretells rain; but we
know it is natural, and produced by natural means, comprehended by
us. Now, how are we sure, or anybody sure, but that our dreams are
produced by the same natural means? There is some faint resemblance
of this in the sense of hearing; the bird is killed before we hear
the report of the gun. However, this is, I must speak well of the
"Knockers," for they have actually stood my good-friends, whether
they are aerial beings called spirits, or whether they are a people
made of matter, not to be felt by our gross bodies, as air and fire
and the like. "Before the discovery of the "Esgair y Mwyn" mine,
these little people, as we call them here, worked hard there day and
night; and there are honest, sober people, who have heard them, and
some persons who have no notion of them or of mines either; but after
the discovery of the great ore they were heard no more. When I began
to work at Llwyn Llwyd, they worked so fresh there for a considerable
time that they frightened some young workmen out of the work. This was
when we were driving levels, and before we had got any ore; but when
we came to the ore, they then gave over, and I heard no more talk of
them. Our old miners are no more concerned at hearing them "blasting,"
boring holes, landing "deads," etc., than if they were some of their
own people; and a single miner will stay in the work, in the dead of
night, without any man near him, and never think of any fear of any
harm they will do him. The miners have a notion that the "knockers"
are of their own tribe and profession, and are a harmless people who
mean well. Three or four miners together shall hear them sometimes,
but if the miners stop to take notice of them, the "knockers" will
also stop; but, let the miners go on at their work, suppose it is
"boring," the "knockers" will at the same time go on as brisk as can
be in landing, "blasting." or beating down the "loose," and they are
always heard a little distance from them before they come to the ore.

"These are odd assertions, but they are certainly facts, though we
cannot, and do not pretend to account for them. We have now very
good ore at "Llwyn Llwyd," where the "knockers" were heard to work,
but we have now yielded the place, and are no more heard. Let who
will laugh, we have the greatest reason to rejoice, and thank the
"knockers," or rather God, who sends us these notices."

The second letter is as follows:--

"I have no time to answer your objection against 'knockers'; I have
a large treatise collected on that head, and what Mr. Derham says is
nothing to the purpose. If sounds of voices, whispers, blasts, working,
or pumping, can be carried on a mile underground, they should always
be heard in the same place, and under the same advantages, and not
once in a month, a year, or two years. Just before the discovery of
ore last week, three men together in our work at "Llwyn Llwyd" were
ear-witnesses of "knockers," pumping, driving a wheelbarrow, etc.;
but there is no pump in the work, nor any mine within less than a
mile of it, in which there are pumps constantly going. If they were
these pumps that they heard, why were they never heard but that once
in the space of a year? And why are they not now heard? But the pumps
make so little noise that they cannot be heard in the other end of
"Esgair y Mwyn" mine when they are at work. We have a dumb and deaf
tailor in the neighbourhood who has a particular language of his
own by signs, and by practice I can understand him and make him
understand me pretty well, and I am sure I could make him learn to
write, and be understood by letters very soon, for he can distinguish
men already by the letters of their names. Now letters are marks to
convey ideas, just after the same manner as the motion of fingers,
hands, eyes, etc. If this man had really seen ore in the bottom of
a sink of water in a mine and wanted to tell me how to come at it,
he would take two sticks like a pump, and would make the motions of a
pumper at the very sink where he knew the ore was, and would make the
motions of driving a wheelbarrow. And what I should infer from thence
would be that I ought to take out the water and sink or drive in the
place, and wheel the stuff out. By parity of reasoning, the language
of "knockers," by imitating the sound of pumping, wheeling, etc.,
signifies that we should take out the water and drive there. This is
the opinion of all old miners, who pretend to understand the language
of the "knockers." Our agent and manager, upon the strength of this
notice, goes on and expect great things. You, and everybody that is
not convinced of the being of "knockers," will laugh at these things,
for they sound like dreams; so does every dark science. Can you make
any illiterate man believe that it is possible to know the distance
of two places by looking at them? Human knowledge is but of small
extent, its bounds are within our view, we see nothing beyond these;
the great universal creation contains powers, etc., that we cannot
so much as guess at. May there not exist beings, and vast powers
infinitely smaller than the particles of air, to whom air is as hard
a body as the diamond is to us? Why not? There is neither great nor
small, but by comparison. Our "knockers" are some of these powers,
the guardians of mines.

"You remember the story in Selden's Table-Talk of Sir Robert Cotton and
others disputing about Moses's shoe. Lady Cotton came in and asked,
'Gentlemen, are you sure it is a shoe?' So the first thing is to
convince mankind that there is a set of creatures, a degree or so
finer than we are, to whom we have given the name of "knockers" from
the sounds we hear in our mines. This is to be done by a collection
of their actions well attested, and that is what I have begun to do,
and then let everyone judge for himself."

We do not hear of "Knockers" in Cardiganshire now; in Cornwall,
however, it is said that they still haunt the mines, and sometimes,
with a sound of knocking and singing, they guide a lucky miner to
find good ore. The "Knockers" were, it was once thought, "the Souls
of the Jews who crucified our Saviour." At least it seems that that
was the belief in Cornwall. Perhaps it would be of interest to add
that there were Cornishmen among the miners of Cardiganshire when
Mr. Lewis Morris wrote the two letters I have just given.



A STORY OF PONT EINION (EINION BRIDGE) TREGARON.

Mr. John Jones, Pontrhydfendigaid, who is now about 95 years of age,
related to me the following tale seven years ago:--

Long ago, when much of the land where now stand the farms of
Ystrad-Caron, Penylan, and Penybont, was a Common, a gentleman named
Einion, and his wife, came from Abergwaun (Fishguard) and settled in
the neighbourhood of Tregaron. Einion inclosed much of the land on
the banks of the river Teivy in that part, and built a fine mansion
which he called Ystrad-Caron, and soon became a most influential
man in the neighbourhood, especially as he was well-to-do, and had
generously constructed at his own expense, a bridge over the river
for the convenience of the poor people of Tregaron and the surrounding
districts. He also loved above everything his wife, and his harp, and
was considered one of the best players on that instrument in Wales;
but, unfortunately, as time went on, he failed to derive any pleasure
from his surroundings and soon became subject to "melancholia,"
imagining that the place was haunted by some evil genius.

At last, he was persuaded by his medical adviser to seek a change
of scenery by going to stay for a while in Pembrokeshire, his native
place. Soon after his arrival at Fishguard, he took a short sea voyage
from that port, but after some adventures, he and others of his fellow
passengers were taken prisoners by a French Man of War.

After spending many years of his lifetime inside the strong walls of
a French prison, he at last succeeded to escape, and soon found his
way once more to the neighbourhood of Tregaron in Cardiganshire; but
to his great astonishment, as he neared his own house, Ystrad-Caron,
after so many years' absence, he heard some music and dancing.

Clothed in rags he knocked at the back door, and pretended to be
a tramp. One of the maid servants took compassion on the "poor
old tramp," and allowed him to come in and warm himself near the
kitchen fire.

"We are very busy here to-day," said she to him, "our mistress who
has been a widow for many years is about to get married again, and
the bride and bridegroom and a party of invited guests are now in the
parlour, but, unfortunately, not one of those present is able to tune
the harp, a fine old instrument which belonged to the lady's first
husband who went away from home and got drowned at sea many years
ago." "Please ask them to allow me to tune the harp," said Einion to
the maid. The girl then went to inform her mistress that there was
an old man in the kitchen who could tune the harp for them.

Einion now entered the parlour, and to the astonishment of the bride
and bridegroom and the guests, soon tuned the harp; and as soon as
he began to play an old favourite tune of his:


    "Myfi bia'm ty, a'm telyn, a'm tân,"
    (My house, and my harp, and my fire are mine).


The lady of the house recognised him at once as her husband.

Then turning to the young bridegroom to whom she was engaged to be
married, addressed him thus:--"You may go now, as my husband has come
home to me once more."

A short time after my visit to Mr. J. Jones, Pontrhydfendigaid, I
went to Tregaron, where I found out from Mr. Jenkin Lloyd (formerly
of Pant), and others, that the story of Pont Einion (Einion Bridge)
was well-known in the neighbourhood, but that Einion during the many
years he was away from home, was not in prison but among the Fairies.

It seems probable that the above story is a modern local version
of a tale which is to be found in the Iolo MSS. entitled:--"Einion
Ap Gwalchmai and the Lady of the Greenwood," which I introduce here
for comparison:--

Einion, the son of Gwalchmai, the son of Meilir, of Treveilir in
Anglesey, married Angharad, the daughter of Ednyved Vychan.

As he was one fine summer morning walking in the woods of Treveilir,
he beheld a graceful slender lady of elegant growth, and delicate
features; and her complexion surpassing every white and red in the
morning dawn, and the mountain snow, and every beautiful colour in the
blossoms of wood, field and hill. He felt in his heart an inconceivable
commotion of affection, and he approached her in a courteous manner,
and she also approached him in the same manner; and he saluted her,
and she returned his salutation; and by these mutual salutations
he perceived that his society was not disagreeable to her. He then
chanced to cast his eye upon her foot, and he saw that she had hoofs
instead of feet, and he became exceedingly dissatisfied. But she told
him that his dissatisfaction was all in vain. "Thou must" said she,
"follow me wheresoever I go, as long as I continue in my beauty,
for this is the consequence of our mutual affection."

Then he requested of her permission to go to his house to take leave
of, and to say farewell to his wife, Angharad, and his son Einion. "I"
said she, "shall be with thee, invisible to all but to thyself;
go visit thy wife and thy son."

So he went, and the Goblin; and when he saw Angharad his wife, he saw
her a hag-like one grown old, but he retained the recollection of days
past, and still felt extreme affection for her, but he was not able to
loose himself from the bond in which he was. "It is necessary for me"
said he, "to part for a time, I know not how long from thee Angharad,
and from thee my son Einion," and they wept together, and broke a
gold ring between them; he kept one half, and Angharad the other;
and they took their leave of each other, and he went with the Lady of
the Wood, and he knew not where; for a powerful illusion was upon him,
and saw not any place, a person, or object under its true and proper
appearance, excepting the half of the ring alone. And after being a
long time, he knew not how long, with the Goblin, the Lady of the Wood,
he looked one morning as the sun was rising upon the half of the ring,
and he bethought him to place it in the most precious place he could
and resolved to put it under his eyelid; and as he was endeavouring to
do so, he could see a man in white apparel, and mounted on a snow-white
horse, coming towards him, and that person asked him what he did there;
and he told him that he was cherishing an afflicting remembrance
of his wife Angharad. "Dos't thou desire to see her," said the man
in white, "get up on this horse behind me"; and that Einion did,
and looking around he could not see any appearance of the Lady of
the Wood, the Goblin; excepting the track of hoofs of marvellous and
monstrous size, as if journeying towards the north. "What delusion
art thou under?" said the man in white. Then Einion answered him and
told everything, how it occurred betwixt him and the Goblin. "Take
this white staff in thy hand," said the man in white; and Einion took
it. And the man in white told him to desire whatever he wished for. The
first thing he desired was to see the Lady of the Wood, for he was not
yet completely delivered from the illusion. And she appeared to him in
size a hideous and monstrous witch, a thousand times more repulsive
of aspect than the most frightful things seen upon earth. And Einion
uttered a cry from terror; and the man in white cast his cloak over
Einion, and in less than a twinkling Einion alighted as he wished on
the hill of Treveilir, by his own house, where he knew scarcely anyone,
nor did anyone know him. After the Goblin had left Einion, the son
of Gwalchmai, she went to Treveilir in the form of an honourable and
powerful nobleman elegantly and sumptuously appareled, and possessed
of an incalculable amount of gold and silver, and also in the prime
of life, that is thirty years of age. And he placed a letter in
Angharad's hand in which it was stated that Einion had died in Norway
more than nine years before, and he then exhibited his gold and wealth
to Angharad; and she, having in the course of time lost much of her
regret, listened to his affectionate address. And the illusion fell
upon her, and seeing that she should become a noble lady higher than
any in Wales, she named a day for her marriage with him. And there was
a great preparation of every elegant and sumptuous kind of apparel,
and of meats and drinks, and of every honourable guest, and every
excellence of song and string, and every preparation of banquet and
festive entertainment. And when the honourable saw a particularly
beautiful harp in Angharad's room, he wished to have it played on;
and the harpers present, the best in Wales, tried to put it in tune,
but were not able. And when everything was made ready for to proceed
to Church to be married, Einion came into the house and Angharad saw
him as an old decrepit, withered, gray-haired man, stooping with
age, and dressed in rags, and she asked him if he would turn the
spit whilst the meat was roasting. "I will," said he and went about
the work with the white staff in his hand after the manner of a man
carrying a pilgrim's staff. And after dinner had been prepared, all
the minstrels failing to put the harp in tune for Angharad, Einion
got up and took it in his hand, and tuned it, and played on it the
air which Angharad loved. And she marvelled exceedingly, and asked
him who he was. And he answered in song and stanza thus:


   "Einion the golden-hearted, am I called by all around;
    The son of Gwalchmai, Ap Meilir
    My fond illusion continued long,
    Evil thought of for my lengthened stay."

   "Where has thou been?"

   "In Kent, in Gwent, in the wood in Monmouth, in Maelor Gorwenydd;
    And in the Valley of Gwyn, the son of Nudd,
    See the bright gold is the token."


And he gave her the ring.


   "Look not on the whitened hue of the hair.
    Where once my aspect was spirited and bold;
    Now gray, without disguise, where once it was yellow;
    The blossoms of the grave--the end of all men.
    The fate that so long affected me, it was time that should
    alter me;
    Never was Angharad out of my remembrance,
    Einion was by thee forgotten."


And she could not bring him to her recollection.

Then said he to the guests:--


   "If I have lost her whom I loved, the fair one of the polished
    mind,
        The daughter of Ednyved Vychan;
    I have not lost (so get you out)--
    Either my bed, or my house, or my fire."


And upon that he placed the white staff in Angharad's hand, and
instantly the Goblin which she had hitherto seen as a handsome and
honourable nobleman, appeared to her as a monster, inconceivably
hideous; and fainted from fear, and Einion supported her until she
revived. And when she opened her eyes, she saw there neither the
Goblin, nor any of the guests, or of the minstrels, nor anything
whatever except Einion, and her son and the harp, and the house in its
domestic arrangement, and the dinner on the table, casting its savoury
odour around. And they sat down to eat; Einion and Angharad and Einion
their son; and exceeding great was the enjoyment. And they saw the
illusion which the demoniacal Goblin had cast over them. And by this
perchance may be seen that love of female beauty and gentleness is the
greatest fascination of man; the love of honours with their vanities
and riches, is the greatest fascination of woman. No man will forget
his wife, unless he sets his heart on the beauty of another; nor woman
her husband, unless she sets her heart on the riches and honour of
lordly vaingloriousness and the pomp of pride. And thus it ends."

Ednyved Vychan, whose name is mentioned in the beginning of the
above story as Einion's father-in-law, was Lord of Brynffenigl in
Denbighshire, and flourished seven hundred years ago. He was a most
powerful chieftain, and from him descended in the male line Henry
VII. King of England, an ancestor to nearly all if not all the present
monarchs of Europe.


