THE FISHERMEN OF LLANDUDOCH AND THE MERMAID.

The following tale appeared in Welsh fifty years ago in "Y Brython,"
Vol. I. page 73; and the writer was the late eminent Welshman
Gwynionydd, father of the present Vicar of Lledrod:--

"On a fine afternoon in September in the beginning of the last
century, a fisherman named Pergrin proceeded to a recess in the
rock near Pen Cemmes, (Pembrokeshire), and found there a mermaid
doing her hair, and he took the water lady prisoner to his boat. We
cannot imagine why the lady had not been more on her guard to avoid
such a calamity; but if sea maidens are anything like land maidens,
they often forget their duties when engaged in dealing with the oil
of Maccassar, and making themselves ready to meet the young men. We
know not what language is used by sea maidens ... but this one this
time at any rate, talked, it is said, very good Welsh; for when she
was in despair in Pergrin's custody weeping copiously, and with her
tresses all dishevelled, she called out "Pergrin, if thou wilt let me
go, I will give three shouts in the time of thy greatest need." So,
in wonder and fear he let her go to walk the streets of the deep and
visit her sweethearts there. Days and weeks passed without Pergrin
seeing her after this; but one hot afternoon, when the sea was pretty
calm, and the fishermen had no thought of danger, behold his old
acquaintance showing her head and locks, and shouting out in a loud
voice: "Pergrin! Pergrin! Pergrin! take up thy nets! take up thy
nets! take up thy nets!" Pergrin and his companion instantly obeyed
the message, and drew their nets in with great haste. In they went,
passed the bar, and by the time they had reached the Pwll Cam, the
most terrible storm had overspread the sea, while he and his companion
were safe on land. Twice nine others had gone out with them, but they
were all drowned, without having the chance of obeying the warning
of the water lady.

A version of the above story is to be found also in Carnarvonshire,
North Wales.


