CHAPTER VI.

GHOST STORIES.


The belief in the existence of Fairies in Wales has almost died out,
but we still find many people who are more or less superstitious
with regard to ghosts, spirits, etc., and the belief in death omens
is rather popular, even among educated people.

The majority of the Welsh ghosts were supposed to be the spirits or
shades of departed mortals, re-appearing on account of some neglected
duty, and in many cases to point out some hidden treasure; for it
was thought that if a person dies, while his money (or any metal)
is still hidden secretly, the spirit of that person cannot rest until
it is revealed. It was also supposed that the spirits of the murdered
haunted the place where their unburied bodies lay, or until vengeance
overtook the murderer, "and the wicked were doomed to walk the earth
until they were laid in lake or river, or in the Red Sea." It was
also thought in former days, if not at present, that the evil one
himself appears sometimes in some form or other; but good spirits
are seen as well as bad ones. I have heard it said by some that
only those who have been born in the night time have the power to
see spirits; others say that spirits take more fancy to some persons
than others. It was also thought that if two persons were together,
one only could see the spirit, to the other he was invisible, and to
one person only would the Spirit speak, and this he would do when
addressed; for according to the laws of the Spirit world, a Spirit
or a ghost has no power of speech until first spoken to.

"Its persistency in haunting is due to its eager desire to speak, and
tell its urgent errand, but the person haunted must take his courage
in both hands and put the question to the issue. Having done so, he
is booked for the end of the business, be it what it may. The mode
of speech adopted must not vary, in addressing a Spirit; in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it must be addressed, and not
otherwise. Its business must be demanded; three times the question
must be repeated, unless the ghost answer earlier. When it answers,
it speaks in a low hollow voice, stating its desire; and it must not
be interrupted while speaking for to interrupt it is dangerous in the
extreme. At the close of its remarks, questions are in order. They
must be promptly delivered, however, or the ghost will vanish. They
must bear on the business in hand; it is offended if asked as to its
state, or other idle questions born of curiosity. Neglect to obey the
ghost's injunctions will lead to much annoyance, and eventually to dire
results. At first the Spirit will appear with a discontented visage,
next with an angry one, and finally with a countenance distorted with
the most ferocious rage." "British Goblins," page 148.

Men sometimes were transported by the spirits through the air, and
the Fairies did this also as well as ghosts. About two years ago, an
old man at Llansadwrn, Carmarthenshire, gave me a remarkable account
of the transportation of a well-known character who lived in that
parish some years ago known as "Evan y Gweydd" (Evan the Weaver). A
version of the story had appeared in Welsh twenty-five years ago,
in an interesting little book entitled "Lloffion Adgof," by T. Edwards.


