THE WEAVER OF LLANSADWRN TRANSPORTED THROUGH THE AIR BY A SPIRIT.

One night Evan y Gweydd found himself speaking with a Spirit who
appeared to him in the form of a gentleman outside the house. The
gentleman asked him whether he would do one thing at his request. "Yes,
if I can," said Evan, in reply. "That is a promise which must be
kept," said the spirit, "and thou shalt have no peace until thou
hast performed it; name the time and sooner the better." Evan said,
"three weeks to to-night." "Very well," said the Spirit, and off it
went. Poor Evan by this began to feel very sorry for making such
a promise, and when the time came round when he was to fulfil his
promise, he barred the door of the house and went to bed; but he
was not there long before he was thrown down on the floor, and found
himself pushed out through the wide open door, unceremoniously, hardly
having time to put on his clothes. After going out he saw the same
gentleman as before, or rather the spirit which assumed the form of
a gentleman who ordered Evan to follow him without delay to a place
called Glan-ty-Bedw, where there was a very large stone, with an iron
chest concealed beneath it. Then the spirit ordered him to take hold
of the box and carry it and throw it into the Fanfach Lake many miles
away. On Sunday morning as they passed through the village of Myddfe
on their way to this lake, Evan noticed the people going to Church,
some of whom he knew, but it seems that they did not see him, and
his companion, or at least they did not seem to notice them. After
reaching the lake and throwing in the chest, there came thunder and
lightning, and Evan was carried through the air in a kind of half
trance. When he came to himself he found himself on the banks of
the river Towy, between that river and Llansadwrn, and not far from
his home. When he reached the house he went to bed, and was very ill
for some time. According to some versions of the story, the spirit
compelled him to throw an iron into the Cothy river near Edwinsford,
as well as a chest into the Fan Lake.

In aerial journey of this kind, the spirit generally gives the mortal
the choice of being transported "above wind, amid wind, or below
wind." The man who chooses to go above wind is borne to an altitude
somewhat equal to that of a balloon, so high that he is in danger of
being frightened to death. But choosing the below wind is quite as bad
and even worse, for the hapless mortal is then dragged through bush
and briar. The safest way is always to remember to select the middle
course (amid wind), for this ensures a pleasant transportation at a
moderate elevation equally removed from the branches and the clouds.

There was a certain man in the neighbourhood of Pontyberem, in
Carmarthenshire, to whom a spirit appeared almost every night, and
offered him an aerial journey of this description, giving him the
choice of above wind, amid wind, or below wind, and on one occasion
he was dragged by the ghost through bush and briar that his clothes
were all in rags.


