A STORY OF A GHOST THROWING STONES AT LLANGELER.

In the parish of Llangeler, Carmarthenshire, May 21st., 1719,
a spirit, which continued for some time, began to throw stones at
those who were in the field. On Thursday in Whitsun week, at eight in
the morning, the thrashing began (at a farm) and at the same time he
(the spirit) began to throw stones. At first it was one of the men
who were thrashing that noticed a stone descending on the thrashing
floor. The second stone fell on the leg of the housemaid, wounding
her; and after this, very shortly, they filled the thrashing floor
and the place around. The men who were thrashing gave up their work,
and went to see who were throwing them, but could see no one.

Friday.--The servant maid in the garden was struck three times. Several
of the children were struck till they went out of the house. A large
number of people came together to see these wonders, and all who came
were allowed to see the stones descending.

Saturday.--The servant maid and one of the thrashers were struck. Some
of the stones were rattling, and something like marks on several of
them. The stones were not seen till they fell, and when they were
taken up marks of them were on the floor as if they had been there
from the year before. A large pole came right across the window
without any one visibly bringing it. Some people believed not, till
they sent messengers to see, and to bring home some of the stones
to their houses. A big stump of wood was taken up from the boiler to
the house top, and fell in another place.

Sunday.--A large number of people came together to see, and several of
them cursing and swearing, and speaking lightly and blasphemously. Big
stones fell on the loft of the house, but were not seen till they
had descended. An iron bar was struck out of the window, and another
one bent as a packsaddle's hook; and the window was broken all to
pieces. After dark the stones came into the beds, and window frames
went to the loft, so that the family of the house were obliged to get
up from their beds and go to a neighbour's house. Nothing but stones
could be seen filling the house and surrounding it.

Wednesday Night.--The barn and the corn as well as many other things
were burnt; he (the spirit) was throwing stones every day, though
not every hour. Sometimes the stones were thrown as fast as one could
reckon them, most of which were river stones, and some of them weighing
about seven pounds or more. Neighbours came together to pray to God in
the house, and there was not much noise in the house that night. Many
other things were done by the spirit, but he at last ceased.

There was a troublesome ghost of this kind now recently in the Vale
of Towy, Carmarthenshire.


