SPIRITS AND HIDDEN TREASURE.

In some of the places supposed to be haunted there are often traditions
of buried treasures in connection with such spots. In some of the
stories the ghost haunts some particular person only, and never gives
him rest till its purpose is accomplished.

Mr. Hall, in his most valuable and interesting "Book of South Wales"
gives a tale of:



A CARPENTER WHO WAS HAUNTED BY A "WHITE LADY."

This man had no peace night or day, for the "White Lady" appeared
to him with an agonizing expression of countenance, at unexpected
times, and unexpected places. Once in a field to which there were
several entrances, she appeared and opposed his exit. Trembling,
he sought another, but there, too, was she. He fainted, and did not
leave the field, till he was found there by persons who happened to
pass. At last some considerable amount of jewels and other valuables
were found by the man, in the secret drawer of an old escritoir,
which he was repairing for a family that resided near. The valuables
were immediately handed over to the owner of the escritoir and the
"White Lady" did not appear afterwards.

Another remarkable story of this class is told in the northern part
of Cardiganshire; and I found the following version of it in a "Scrap
Book" of Mr. William Davies, Talybont, an eminent Folk-Lorist:--



THE "WHITE LADY" OF BROGININ, OR A GHOST REVEALING HIDDEN MONEY TO
A YOUNG LOVER.

Broginin is a farm house where the famous Welsh Bard, Dafydd
Ap Gwilym was born, and situated six miles from Aberystwyth in
Cardiganshire. Some years ago the respectable and industrious family
who lived there at the time, were often disturbed by some unearthly
being who generally made his appearance in the depth of night,
as it is the case with spirits. This unwelcome visitor aroused the
whole family by walking up and down the stairs, or from one room into
another. Sometimes he closed the doors behind him, making such noise
as to strike terror to the hearts of all in the house. At times,
he lighted up the whole house at once with gleaming light, and the
next moment vanished as suddenly as he came, leaving behind him
utter darkness. Occasionally, the same ghost was seen by some of the
servantmen, who had been out courting, walking across the farmyard in
the form of a "white lady," appearing as a tall handsome lady attired
in lustring white dress, and her face covered by silken veil. This
"White Lady" walked towards the young men, and suddenly disappeared
in a tremendous ball of fire. People were so terrified by such sights,
that several families, one after another moved away from the house. One
Sunday evening, however, about the beginning of winter, when all
the family as usual had gone to chapel, except the servant maid,
who did not feel well, her lover came to keep her company. Naturally,
the young man and the young woman began to talk about the ghost, and
Evan (for that was the young man's name) laughed, and boasted what
he was going to do should the disturber appear. But the next moment,
without the least notice, a lady in her white dress stood right in the
middle of the room, with her face uncovered, and her brown curly hair
down over her shoulders. She held in one hand a comb and in the other
a roll of paper, but she did not whisper a word. The servant maid,
and her young man who had just been boasting shuddered in terror, and
dared not move or utter a word. The "lady" walked round the apartment
several times; then suddenly stood; and having opened the door through
which she had entered without opening, beckoned the young man to follow
her. As he dared not disobey, he followed her up stairs, into a dark
back room, but which was now lighted up in some mysterious way. With
her finger she pointed out a particular corner under the low roof,
at which place the young man with his trembling hand found some hard
parcel carefully tied in an old woollen stocking. When he opened it
he found it full of money, and at the same moment the "White Lady"
vanished and never disturbed the house again.


