A GHOST REVEALING HIDDEN TREASURE TO A FARMER IN THE PARISH OF
LLANAFAN.

Crosswood Park, the fine residence of my esteemed young friend the
Earl of Lisburne, is situated about nine miles from Aberystwyth. About
two miles from the Park is a bridge over the river Ystwyth, known as
Pont Llanafan (Llanafan Bridge).

This bridge is supposed to be haunted, and I have been told that
a ghost has been seen there lately by a gentleman who lives in the
district.

Mr. John Jones, an old man of 95, who lives at Pontrhydfendigaid,
informed me that the origin of this ghost is to be traced to some
former days when retired pirates lived in a house near the Bridge, and
who were supposed to have hidden some treasure in the spot. Mr. Jones
also gave me the following story of a farmer named Edwards, who
lived in a small farm house near the bridge two or three generations
ago:--The poor farmer worked very hard, but for some time he was
continually molested by a mischievous ghost day and night. In the
evening when Edwards sat down in the corner eating his supper, which
consisted of bread and milk, stones came down through the chimney, or
ashes were thrown into his milk by some invisible hand. At another time
the ghost was heard thrashing in the barn, or meddling with something
continually. One day when the man was engaged in making a new fence
round his field, the troublesome visitor from the other world kept
with him all day, and threw down both the fence and the gate. Edwards
at last decided to address the spirit in these word:--"Yn enw Duw,
paham yr wyt yn fy aflonyddi o hyd?" which means in English, "In the
name of God, why doest thou trouble me continually?" We are not told
what was the reply of the spirit, but it was generally believed by
the neighbours that he revealed to the farmer some hidden treasure
in an old wall not far from the house. Edwards took down this wall
and built a new house with the stones and greatly prospered. It was
also said that he had been comparatively poor once, but ever since
his conversation with the spirit, his cattle and his horses soon
increased and fortune and good luck smiled on him all round. About two
years ago when I related this story to a friend of mine who lives at
Pontrhydfendigaid, to my great surprise, his wife informed me that
the account is quite true. "Yes," said she, "and I got £500 of the
Ghost's money." The lady, strange to say, happened to be a descendant,
or at least a near relation of the Llanafan farmer to whom the ghost
revealed the hidden treasure.

Not far from the same Llanafan bridge there is a rock known as
"Craig yr Ogof" (Rock of the Cave). Countess Amherst, (now Dowager)
informed me that there is a tradition in the neighbourhood that the
Romans buried treasures there.


