THE POWIS CASTLE GHOST STORY.

The following ghost story is recorded in the autobiography of the
grandfather of the late Mr. Thomas Wright, the eminent Shropshire
antiquary:--

It had been for some time reported in the neighbourhood that a
poor unmarried woman, who was a member of the Methodist Society,
and had become serious under their ministry, had seen and conversed
with the apparition of a gentleman, who had made a strange discovery
to her. Mr. Hampson (a preacher among the Methodists about the end
of the 18th century) being desirous to ascertain if there was any
truth in the story, sent for the woman, and desired her to give him
an exact relation of the whole affair from her own mouth, and as near
the truth as she possibly could. She said she was a poor woman, who
got her living by spinning hemp or line; that it was customary for the
farmers and gentlemen of that neighbourhood to grow a little hemp or
line in a corner of their fields for their own consumption, and as
she was a good hand at spinning the materials, she used to go from
house to house to inquire for work; that her method was, where they
employed her, during her stay, to have meat, and drink, and lodging
(if she had occasion to sleep with them), for her work, and what they
pleased to give her besides. That, among other places, she happened
to call one day at the Welsh Earl of Powis's country seat, called
Redcastle, to inquire for work, as she usually had done before. The
quality were at this time in London, and had left the steward and his
wife, with other servants, as usual, to take care of their country
residence in their absence. The steward's wife set her to work, and
in the evening told her that she must stay all night with them, as
they had more work for her to do next day. When bedtime arrived, two
or three servants in company, with each a lighted candle in her hand,
conducted her to her lodging. They led her to a ground room, with a
boarded floor, and two sash windows. The room was grandly furnished,
and had a genteel bed in one corner of it. They had made her a good
fire, and had placed her a chair and a table before it, and a large
lighted candle upon the table. They told her that was her bedroom,
and that she might go to sleep when she pleased. They then wished her
a good night and withdrew altogether, pulling the door quickly after
them, so as to hasp the spring-snech in the brass lock that was upon
it. When they were gone, she gazed awhile at the fine furniture, under
no small astonishment that they should put such a poor person as her
in so grand a room, and bed, with all the apparatus of fire, chair,
table, and a candle. She was also surprised at the circumstance of the
servants coming so many together, with each of them a candle. However,
after gazing about her some little time, she sat down and took a
small Welsh Bible out of her pocket, which she always carried about
with her, and in which she usually read a chapter--chiefly in the
New Testament--before she said her prayers and went to bed. While
she was reading she heard the door open, and turning her head, saw a
gentleman enter in a gold-laced hat and waistcoat, and the rest of
his dress corresponding therewith. I think she was very particular
in describing the rest of his dress to Mr. Hampson, and he to me at
the time, but I have now forgot the other particulars. He walked down
by the sash-window to the corner of the room and then returned. When
he came to the first window in his return (the bottom of which was
nearly breast high), he rested his elbow on the bottom of the window,
and the side of his face upon the palm of the hand, and stood in that
leaning posture for some time, with his side partly towards her. She
looked at him earnestly to see if she knew him, but, though from her
frequent intercourse with them, she had a personal knowledge of all the
present family, he appeared a stranger to her. She supposed afterwards
that he stood in this manner to encourage her to speak; but as she did
not, after some little time he walked off, pulling the door after him
as the servants had done before. She began now to be much alarmed,
concluding it to be an apparition, and that they had put her there
on purpose. This was really the case. The room, it seems, had been
disturbed for a long time, so that nobody could sleep peaceably in it,
and as she passed for a very serious woman, the servants took it into
their heads to put the Methodist and Spirit together, to see what
they would make of it. Startled at this thought, she rose from her
chair, and knelt down by the bedside to say her prayers. While she was
praying he came in again, walked round the room, and came close behind
her. She had it on her mind to speak, but when she attempted it she was
so very much agitated that she could not utter a word. He walked out
of the room again, pulling the door after him as before. She begged
that God would strengthen her and not suffer her to be tried beyond
what she could bear. She recovered her spirits, and thought she felt
more confidence and resolution, and determined if he came in again
she would speak to him. He presently came in again, walked round and
came behind her as before; she turned her head and said, "Pray, sir,
who are you, and what do you want?" He put up his finger, and said,
"Take up the candle and follow me, and I will tell you." She got up,
took up the candle, and followed him out of the room. He led her
through a long boarded passage till they came to the door of another
room, which he opened and went in. It was a small room, or what might
be called a large closet. "As the room was small, and I believed
him to be a Spirit," she said, "I stopped at the door; he turned
and said, 'Walk in, I will not hurt you.' So I walked in. He said,
'Observe what I do.' I said, 'I will.' He stooped, and tore up one
of the boards of the floor, and there appeared under it a box with an
iron handle in the lid. He said, 'Do you see that box?' I said, 'Yes,
I do.' He then stepped to one side of the room, and showed me a crevice
in the wall, where he said a key was hid that would open it. He said
'This box and key must be taken out, and sent to the Earl in London'
(naming the Earl, and his place of residence in the city). He said,
'Will you see it done?' I said, 'I will do my best to get it done.' He
said, 'Do, and I will trouble the house no more.' He then walked out
of the room and left me. (He seems to have been a very civil Spirit,
and to have been very careful to affright her as little as possible). I
stepped to the room door and set up a shout. The steward and his wife,
and the other servants came to me immediately, all clung together, with
a number of lights in their hands. It seems they all had been waiting
to see the issue of the interview betwixt me and the apparition. They
asked me what was the matter? I told them the foregoing circumstances,
and showed them the box. The steward durst not meddle with it, but
his wife had more courage, and with the help of the other servants,
lugged it out, and found the key." She said by their lifting it
appeared to be pretty heavy, but that she did not see it opened, and,
therefore, did not know what it contained; perhaps money, or writings
of consequence to the family, or both. They took it away with them,
and she then went to bed and slept peaceably till the morning. It
appeared afterwards that they sent the box to the Earl in London,
with an account of the manner of its discovery and by whom; and the
Earl sent down orders immediately to his steward to inform the poor
woman who had been the occasion of this discovery, that if she would
come and reside in his family, she should be comfortably provided for,
for the remainder of her days; or, if she did not choose to reside
constantly with them, if she would let them know when she wanted
assistance, she should be liberally supplied, at his Lordship's
expense as long as he lived. And Mr. Hampson said it was a known
fact in the neighbourhood that she had been so supplied from his
Lordship's family from the time the affair was said to have happened,
and continued to be so at the time she gave Mr. Hampson this account.

To touch or dig for buried treasures guarded by a ghost without
the ghost's consent always brings thunder and lightning. Such is the
tradition in connection with "Carreg y Bwci" on the top of Craig Twrch,
on the borders of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire.

Many of the tales displaying the motive, on the ghost's part of a duty
to perform--sometimes clearly defining, sometimes vaguely suggesting
it, as in the story of Noe.

The evening was far gone when a traveller of the name of Noe arrived at
an Inn in Pembrokeshire, and called for refreshments. After remaining
sometime he remarked that he must proceed on his journey. 'Surely,'
said the astonished landlord, 'You will not travel at night for it is
said that a ghost haunts that road,' crying out, 'The days are long
and the nights are cold to wait for Noe. O, I am the man sought for,'
said he, and immediately departed; but, strange to say, neither Noe
nor the ghost was ever heard of afterwards.

An old woman in Pembrokeshire informed me that the scene of the above
tale was a house in the neighbourhood of Letterston.

Another story of this class appeared in an interesting little Welsh
book entitled "Ysten Sioned," published by Hughes and Son, Wrexham.

There was a farmhouse in a certain part of West Wales, in which a
large and respectable family lived. But there was one room in the
house haunted by a troublesome spirit which often cried out in a
mournful voice, "Hir yw'r dydd, a hir yw'r nos, a hir yw aros Arawn"
(long is the day, and long is the night, and long is waiting for
Arawn). Things went on in this manner for a long time, and not one
hardly ventured to open the door of that room. But one cold winter
evening when every member of the family sat around the fire, before
supper, somebody called at the door of the house, and a stranger was
welcomed in to warm himself by the fire. The stranger asked for some
food and a bed for the night. He was told he was welcomed of food, but
that they were sorry they could not offer him a bed, as all the beds
were hardly enough for themselves, and that the only spare bed-room
in the house was haunted. Then the stranger begged to be allowed to
sleep in that room, as he felt sure that there was nothing to do him
harm there. The man appeared very tired, and spoke but little except
in reply to questions, and when it was found out that his name was
"Arawn," all the family looked into each's face in great surprise. The
stranger presently went to bed in the haunted room, and strange to
say everything was quiet in that room that night, that is, no spirit
was heard as usual crying and moving things about. When the family
got up next morning, the first thing was to find out what kind of
night the stranger passed in the haunted room, but to the surprise
of all the man was gone, and the ghost was also gone, for the room
was never haunted afterwards.


