SPIRIT OF A LIVING MAN IN A FIELD.

I heard the following story in the neighbourhood of Llanddewi, about
my own grandfather, the late Mr. John Evans, of Gogoyan, who died
about fifty-five years ago. (The "Hiriaid Gogoyan" were descended
from Gruffydd Hir o Llanfair, great-great-grandson of Gwaethfoed);
so saith Gwynionydd, in his book on "Enwogion Ceredigion." But now
for the story:--

Mr. Evans one day had gone to Aberystwyth, either riding or driving
as this was in the days before the introduction of railways into that
part, the distance was over twenty miles.

Early in the afternoon on the same day one of his servants who was
ploughing in the field, saw Mr. Evans walking about quite close to
him in the field.

The servant was quite surprised at this, as he knew that his master
had gone to Aberystwyth early in the morning. When the master came
home that night from Aberystwyth, the servant told him that he had
seen him in the afternoon in the field.

"Well," said Evans in reply, "if you saw me you only saw my spirit,
for I have been away all day; now to see the spirit of a living man
is not a bad sign."

It is rather curious that a story very similar to the above is given
by Mr. T. Lloyd, Dinas Powis, in "Cymru Fu" ("Weekly Mail" reprints)
for November 16th, 1889, which is as follows:--



"YSFRYD DYN BYW.

"Many years ago at a farm called Ystradteilo, near the pretty village
of Llanrhystyd in Cardiganshire, the servant girl was sent to the
field to fetch home the cows for milking, and while in the field she
saw her master doing something there. The master's name was Williams,
and he was a near relation to the eminent scholar Rev. E. Williams,
M.A., of Lampeter. When, however, the servant girl returned home,
she was astonished to find her master in the house. 'How in the world
did you come home so quick?' she asked. 'Just now I saw you in the
field.' He replied that he had not been from the house during the
afternoon, and added, 'look here, girl, that was not a bad sign at
all but if you will see me like that after my departure you may depend
that I shall be in a place of torture.' It was a general belief that
of the dead the ghosts of the wicked only were to be seen."


