A PEMBROKESHIRE GHOST HAUNTING A SHIP.

Sometimes we hear of ghosts at sea, and the following account of a
Ghost on board H.M.S. "Asp," which was written by Capt. Alldridge,
R.N., Commander of that vessel, appeared in the "Pembroke County
Guardian," February 16th, 1901.


March 15th, 1867.

My dear Sir,--I herewith readily comply with your request as far
as I am able, respecting the unaccountable "apparition" on board my
ship. Call it ghost or what you will, still I assure you that which I
am going to relate is what really did take place, and much as I was,
and am, a sceptic in ghost stories, I must confess myself completely
at a loss to account by natural causes for that which did actually
occur. Many years having elapsed since I retired from active service
I am unable to recollect all the dates with exactness, but I will
give them as far as I can remember them.

In the year 1850, the "Asp" was given me by the Admiralty as a
surveying vessel. On taking possession of her, the Superintendent
of the Dockyard, where she lay, remarked to me, "Do you know, Sir,
your ship is said to be haunted, and I don't know if you will get any
of the Dockyard men to work on her." I, of course, smiled, and I said
"I don't care for ghosts, and dare say I shall get her all to lights
fast enough."

I engaged the shipwrights to do the necessary repairs to the vessel,
but before they had been working in her a week they came to me in
a body and begged me to give the vessel up as she was haunted and
could never bring anything but ill-luck. However, the vessel was at
length repaired, and arrived in safety in the river Dee, where she
was to commence her labours. After my tea in the evening, I generally
sat in my cabin and either read to myself or had an officer of mine
(who is now master of the 'Magician') to read aloud to me: on such
occasions we used frequently to be interrupted by strange noises,
often such as would be caused by a drunken man or a person staggering
about, which appeared to issue from the after (or ladies') cabin.

The two cabins were only separated from each other by the companion
ladder, the doors faced each other, so that from my cabin I could
see into the after one. There was no communication between either
of them and the other parts of the ship, excepting by the companion
ladder, which no one could ascend or descend without being seen
from my cabin. The evening shortly after our arrival in the Dee,
the officer I mentioned was reading to me in my cabin when all at
once his voice was drowned by a violent and prolonged noise in the
aft cabin. Thinking it must be the steward he called out "Don't make
such a noise, steward," and the noise ceased. When he began to read
again the noise also recommenced. "What are you doing, steward--making
such a--noise for?" he cried out, and taking the candle rushes into
the next cabin. But he came back quicker than he went, saying there
was nobody there.

He recommenced reading, and once more began the mysterious noise. I
felt sure there was some drunken person there whom my officer had
overlooked, and accordingly rose and looked myself, and to my very
disagreeable surprise found the cabin empty!

After this evening, the noises became very frequent, varying in kind
and in degree. Sometimes it was as though the seats and lockers were
being banged about, sometimes it sounded as though decanters and
tumblers were being clashed together. During these disturbances the
vessel was lying more than a mile off shore.

One evening I and the above-named officer went to drink tea at a
friend's house at Queen's Ferry, near Chester, the vessel at the time
being lashed to the lower stage opposite Church's Quay. We returned on
board together about 10 p.m. While descending the companion ladder,
I distinctly heard someone rush from the after cabin into the fore
cabin. I stopped the officer who was behind me at the top of the
ladder and whispered to him, "Stand still, I think I have caught the
ghost." I then descended into my cabin, took my sword, which always
hung over my bed, and placed it drawn in his hand saying "Now ----,
allow no one to pass you; if anyone attempts to escape cut him down,
I will stand the consequences. T then returned to the cabin, struck
a light and searched everywhere, but nothing could I find to account
for the noises I had heard, though I declare solemnly that never did
I feel more certain of anything in my life than that I should find
a man there. So there was nothing to be done but to repeat for the
hundredth time, "Well, it is the ghost again!" Often when lying in my
bed at night have I heard noises close to me as though my drawers were
being opened and shut, the top of my washing stand raised and banged
down again, and a bed which stood on the opposite side of my cabin,
pulled about; while of an evening I often heard while sitting in my
cabin a noise as though a percussion cap were snapped close to my
head; also very often (and I say it with godly and reverential fear)
I have been sensible of the presence of something invisible about me,
and could have put my hand, so to say, on it, or the spot where I felt
it was; and all this occurred, strange to say, without my feeling in
the least alarmed or caring about it, except so far that I could not
understand or account for what I felt and heard.

One night, when the vessel was at anchor in Martyn Roads I was awoke
by the quartermaster calling me and begging me to come on deck as
the look-out man had rushed to the lower deck, saying that a figure
of a lady was standing on the paddle box pointing with her finger to
Heaven. Feeling angry, I told him to send the look-out man on deck
again and keep him there till daybreak, but in attempting to carry my
orders into execution the man went into violent convulsions, and the
result was I had to go myself upon deck and remain there till morning.

This apparition was often seen after this, and always as described
with her finger pointing towards Heaven.

One Sunday afternoon while lying in the Haverfordwest river opposite
to Lawrenny, the crew being all on shore, and I being at church,
my steward (the only man on board) whilst descending the companion
ladder was spoken to by an unseen voice. He immediately fell down with
fright, and I found his appearance so altered that I really scarcely
knew him! He begged to be allowed his discharge and to be landed as
soon as possible, to which I felt obliged to consent as he could not
be persuaded to remain on board for the night. The story of the ship
being haunted becoming known on shore, the clergyman of Lawrenny called
on me one day and begged me to allow him to question the crew, which
he accordingly did. He seemed very much impressed by what he heard; he
seemed to view the matter in a serious light and said that his opinion
was that "some troubled spirit must be lingering about the vessel."

During the years that I commanded the "Asp" I lost many of my men who
ran away on being refused their discharge, and a great many others I
felt forced to let go, so great was their fear, one and all telling
me the same tale, namely, that at night they saw the transparent
figure of a lady pointing with her finger up to Heaven. For many
years I endeavoured to ridicule the affair as I was often put to
considerable inconvenience by the loss of hands, but to no purpose. I
believe that when the officers went out of the vessel after dark none
of the crew would have ventured into the cabin on any account. One
night I was awoke from my sleep by a hand, to all sensations, being
placed on my leg outside the bedclothes. I lay still for a moment to
satisfy myself of the truth of what I felt, and then grabbed at it,
but caught nothing. I rang my bell for the quartermaster to come with
his lantern, but found nothing. This occurred to me several times,
but on one occasion as I lay wide awake a hand was placed on my
forehead. If ever a man's hair stood on end mine did then. I sprang
clean out of bed: there was not a sound. Until then I had never felt
the least fear of the ghost or whatever you like to call it. In fact
I had taken a kind of pleasure in listening to the various noises as
I lay in bed, and sometimes when the noises were very loud I would
suddenly pull my bell for the look-out man and then listen attentively
if I could hear the sound of a footstep or attempt to escape, but
there never was any, and I would hear the look-out man walk from his
post to my cabin when I would merely ask him some questions as to the
wind and weather. At length in 1857, the vessel requiring repairs,
was ordered alongside the dockyard wall at Pembroke. The first night
the sentry stationed near the ship saw (as he afterwards declared)
a lady mount the paddle box holding up her hand towards Heaven. She
then stepped on shore and came along the path towards him when he
brought his musket to the charge "who goes there?" But the figure
walked through the musket, upon which he dropped it and ran for
the guard house. The next sentry saw all this take place and fired
off his gun to alarm the guard. The figure then glided past a third
sentry who was placed near the ruins of Pater old Church, and who
watched her, or it, mount the top of a grave in the old churchyard,
point with her finger to Heaven, and then stand till she vanished from
his sight. The sergeant of the guard came with rank and file to learn
the tale, and the fright of the sentries all along the Dockyard wall
was so great that none would remain at their post unless they were
doubled, which they were, as may be seen by the "Report of guard" for
that night. Singularly enough, since that, the ghost has never been
heard of again on board the Asp, and I never heard the noises which
before had so incessantly annoyed me. The only clue I could ever find
to account for my vessel being haunted is as follows:--Some years
previously to my having her, the "Asp" had been engaged as a mail
packet between Port Patrick and Donaghadee. After one of her trips,
the passengers having all disembarked, the stewardess on going into
the ladies' cabin found a beautiful girl with her throat cut lying
in one of the sleeping berths quite dead! How she came by her death
no one could tell and, though, of course, strict investigations were
commenced, neither who she was or where she came from or anything about
her was ever discovered. The circumstances gave rise to much talk,
and the vessel was remanded by the authorities, and she was not again
used until handed over to me for surveying service. Here end my tale,
which I have given in all truth. Much as I know one gets laughed at
for believing in ghost stories you are welcome to make what use you
please with this true account of the apparition on board the "Asp."


