GOING ROUND THE CHURCH.

This kind of divination was perhaps of a more uncanny character
than anything I have hitherto mentioned, and a custom which both
young men and young women very commonly practised, even within the
last 50 years as I have been told by old people. This weird practice
was to go round the parish church seven times, some say nine times,
whilst others again say nine times-and-half, and holding a knife in
the hand saying the while:--


    "Dyma'r twca, lle mae'r wain?"
    "Here's the knife, where is the sheath?"


It was also the practice to look in through the key-hole of the church
door each time whilst going round, and many people assert to this very
day that whoever performed this mode of divination in proper order,
that the spirit of his or her future wife or husband would appear
with a sheath to fit the knife; but, if the young man or woman was
to die single, a coffin would meet him or her. Mr. John Jones, of
Pontrhydfendigaid, an intelligent old man of 95, with a wonderful
memory, told me that, when a boy, he had heard his mother giving
a most sad account of what happened to a young woman who did this
at Ystrad Meurig in Cardiganshire about the year 1800. She was the
daughter of a public house in the village, and the name of her mother
was Catherine Dafydd Evan. Mr. Jones's mother knew the family well;
some of them emigrated to America.

This young woman was in love with one of the students of St. John's
College, in the neighbourhood, and being anxious to know whether he
was to be her husband or not, she resorted to this uncanny practice
of walking nine times round Ystrad Meurig Church. Around and round
she went, holding the knife in her hand and repeating the words of
incantation, "Here's the knife, where is the sheath?" And whilst she
was performing her weird adventure, to her great alarm, she perceived
a clergyman coming out to meet her through the church door with his
white surplice on, as if coming to meet a funeral procession. The
frightened young woman fell down in a swoon, almost half dead, as she
imagined that the one she met with a surplice on was an apparition
or the spirit of a clergyman officiating at the phantom funeral of
herself, which prognosticated that instead of going to be married,
she was doomed to die.

It turned out that the apparition she had seen was only one of the
students, who, in order to frighten her, had secretly entered the
Church for the purpose. But the poor girl recovered not, and she died
very soon afterwards.

I heard the following story from my mother when I was a boy. A girl
had determined to obtain a sight of her future husband by going round
the parish church nine times at All Hallows' Eve in the same manner
as the young woman I mentioned in the above story, but with more
fortunate results. This also happened somewhere in Cardiganshire or
Carmarthenshire. Just as the young woman was walking round the ninth
time, she saw, to her great surprise, her own master (for she was a
servant maid) coming to meet her. She immediately ran home and asked
her mistress why she had sent her master after her to frighten her. But
the master had not gone out from the house. On hearing the girl's
account, the mistress was greatly alarmed and was taken ill, and she
apprehended that she herself was doomed to die, and that her husband
was going to marry this servant girl, ultimately. Then the poor woman
on her death bed begged the young woman to be kind to her children,
"For you are to become the mistress here," said she, "when I am gone."

It was also a custom in Wales once for nine young girls to meet
together to make a pancake, with nine different things, and share it
between them, that is, each of the girls taking a piece before going
to bed in order to dream of their future husbands.

Another practice among young girls was to sleep on a bit of wedding
cake.


