PENTRE-CWRT FOLK AND THE DEVIL.

Once upon a time the devil was offended with the people of Pentre-Cwrt,
in Carmarthenshire, and decided to drown them. One day in order to do
this mischief the Evil One was seen going along with a big shovelful of
mound; and when he came to the parish of Llandyssul in Cardiganshire,
which was only about two miles from Pentre-Cwrt, he met with a cobbler
who carried a very large bundle of old shoes. After saluting the devil
the cobbler asked him to where did he intend taking the shovelful
of mound? "To the mouth of Alltcafan," was the reply. "For what
purpose?" asked the cobbler again. "To dam the River Teivy so as to
drown the people of Pentre-Cwrt," said the devil. Now the cobbler was
a very shrewd man, and in order to frustrate the evil design of the
Old Gentleman, he told him that the place where he intended to dam
the river was very far away. "How far is it?" asked the devil. "I
cannot tell you the exact distance," replied the cobbler, "but in
walking from there I have worn out all these shoes." "If that is so,"
said the devil, "it is too far, for I am already tired," and down did
he throw the shovelful of mould, and the shovelful which the devil
threw down is to be seen to this day, and known as Cnwc Coedfoel.--See
Hanes Plwyf Llangeler, gan D. Jones.

Sometimes the devil manifests himself in a ball of fire, at other
times in the form of a pig, mouse, calf, dog, or headless horse,
and even as a gentleman on horseback, as we have already seen in the
Rhosmeherin ghost story.

When I was in North Pembrokeshire a few years ago, I was told by
several old people in the village of Eglwyswrw that the Evil One
sometimes was to be seen at Yet Wen in that neighbourhood; occasionally
as a "white lady," but more often as a white cat.

The people of the same village informed me that Yet Wen, Pen'rallt,
was also a favourite resort of the devil, and that a woman once in
passing the spot at night, shouted "Come out you d----l," and the
next moment a white cat appeared.

Nags Head, in the same county was once haunted by the devil, as it
seems from the following story of long ago:--


