THE GWYLLGI, OR DOG OF DARKNESS.

The Gwyllgi was a frightful apparition of a mastiff with baleful
breath and blazing red eyes. In former times, an apparition in
this shape haunted Pant y Madog, in the neighbourhood of Laugharne,
Carmarthenshire. A woman named Rebecca Adams, passing this spot late
one night, fell down in a swoon, when she saw the spectral dog coming
towards her. When within a few yards of her it stopped, squatted
on its hounchers, "and set up such a scream, so loud, so horrible,
and so strong, that she thought the earth moved under her." I was
informed at Llangynog five years ago, that Spectral Dogs still haunt
that part of Carmarthenshire; and more than one of my informants had
seen such apparitions themselves.

A spirit in animal form was not always a demon; sometimes the Spirit
of a mortal was doomed to wear this shape for some offence.

It was once believed that the Evil One, either from lust, or from
nefarious designs, assumed the form of a young man or a young woman.

The following two stories, the first from South Pembrokeshire, and
the other from Gower, have reference to this belief.



"A DEMON STEWARD."

Giraldus Cambrensis in his Itinerary through Wales (Bohn's edition,
page 110) says:--

"In the province of Pembrock (Pembroke), another instance occurred,
about the same time, of a spirit's appearing in the house of Elidore
de Stakepole, not only sensibly, but visibly, under the form of a
red-haired young man, who called himself Simon. First seizing the keys
from the person to whom they were entrusted, he impudently assumed the
steward's office, which he managed so prudently and providently, that
all things seemed to abound under his care, and there was no deficiency
in the house. Whatever the master or mistress secretly thought of
having for their daily use or provision, he procured with wonderful
agility, and without any previous directions, saying, "You wished that
to be done, and it shall be done for you." He was also well acquainted
with their treasures and secret hoards, and sometimes upbraided them
on that account; for as often as they seemed to act sparingly and
avariciously, he used to say, "Why are you afraid to spend that heap
of gold or silver, since your lives are of so short duration, and the
money you so cautiously hoard up will never do you any service?" He
gave the choicest meat and drink to the rustics and hired servants,
saying that "Those persons should be abundantly supplied, by whose
labours they were acquired." Whatever he determined should be done,
whether pleasing or displeasing to his master or mistress (for, as
we have said before, he knew all their secrets), he completed in his
usual expeditious manner, without their consent. He never went to
church or uttered one catholic word. He did not sleep in the house,
but was ready at his office in the morning. He was at length observed
by some of the family to hold his nightly converse near a mill and
a pool of water; upon which discovery, he was summoned the next
morning before the master of the house and his lady, and, receiving
his discharge, delivered up the keys, which he had held for upwards
of forty days. Being earnestly interrogated, at his departure who
he was? he answered, "That he was begotten upon the wife of a rustic
in that parish, by a demon, in the shape of her husband, naming the
man, and his father-in-law, then dead, and his mother, still alive;
the truth of which the woman upon examination, openly avowed."


