A DEMON TEMPTING A YOUNG MAIDEN IN GOWER.

For the following tale I am indebted to Mr. T. C. Evans (Cadrawd)
the eminent antiquarian and folk-lorist of Llangynwyd:

"Once upon a time there lived a fair and gentle maiden in the
neighbourhood of the Demon's Rock, who often wandered out in the sunset
and balmy summer evenings to meet her lover, and would return with her
countenance radiant with joy, and the bright light of inexpressible
rapture beaming in her love-lighted eye. Evening after evening
would she stray out alone to the trysting place to meet her lover,
and seemed as happy as a bird that warbles its morning song when
the early sun gladdens the earth. However, it chanced that one of
her companions followed her one moonlight night--saw the maiden go
to a widespreading oak, and heard the whispering soft and low. She
was surprised that she could not observe anyone, neither could she
hear any reply to the maiden's sweet and loving voice. Affrighted,
she hastened back and said that a mysterious dread had crept over
her while listening and watching her companion; they kept it secret,
but questioned the maiden on her return. She said that her lover was a
gentleman, and that she had promised to meet him the next evening in
the same spot. The next evening they followed her again and saw her
addressing the empty air--they felt assured now that it must be the
Spirit of Darkness that was tempting the girl. Her companions warned
her and told her how she had been watched, and that they could not
see who or whom she spoke to.

"She became alarmed, but yet could not refrain from meeting her lover,
(as she supposed), once again, as she had made a vow and bound
herself by a solemn promise to meet him in this valley in the dead
hour of the night. She was also bound to go alone. It was a fearful
trial. The night came, the moon hid itself, and dark clouds swept
hurriedly across the sky. With blanched cheeks and trembling steps
the maiden approached the appointed place. She held (firmly grasped)
in her hand a Bible, and as the traitor approached, a straggling gleam
of moonshine revealed his form; and oh! horrible to relate, she saw the
cloven hoof! With one long piercing cry for protection from heaven she
fled; at the same instant the valley was filled with wild unearthly
shrieks. The roar of the deafening thunder shook the hills to their
foundations; wild and blinding lightnings, together with yells and
howls from the legions of baffled fiends rushed by on the startled air.

"The bewildered whirlwinds dashed through the woodlands, snapping the
oaks of a century like fragile reeds, or hurling them like feathers
down into the brook--now a boiling torrent that swept all before
it. In the morning a strange scene of devastation presented itself,
and the woods seemed crumbled up; the valley was a chaotic mass of
confusion, while in the centre of the hamlet was this huge stone which
they say the vengeful demon tore from its firm bed on the hillside,
and flung at the flying maiden as she evaded his grasp. It remains
in the spot where it was cast, and is known as the Demon's Rock."

There is also a story all over Wales of the Evil One appearing to a
young man as a lovely young lady.



SATAN AND SABBATH BREAKERS; OR THE "OLD GENTLEMAN" APPEARING IN MANY
FORMS TO A MAN WHO TRAVELLED ON SUNDAY.

The late Rev. Elias Owen, "Welsh Folk-Lore," page 152, Vicar of
Llanyblodwel, received the following tale from his deceased friend,
the Rev. J. L. Davies, late Rector of Llangynog, who had obtained it
from William Davies, the man who figures in the story:--

"William Davies, Penrhiw, near Aberystwyth, went to England for
the harvest, and after having worked there about three weeks, he
returned home alone, with all possible haste, as he knew that his
father-in-law's fields were by this time ripe for the sickle. He,
however, failed to accomplish the journey before Sunday; but he
determined to travel on Sunday, and thus reached home on Sunday night
to be ready to commence reaping on Monday morning. His conscience,
though, would not allow him to be at rest, but he endeavoured to
silence its twittings by saying to himself that he had with him no
clothes to go to a place of worship. He stealthily, therefore, walked
on, feeling very guilty every step he took, and dreading to meet
anyone going to Chapel or Church. By Sunday evening he had reached
the hill overlooking Llanfihangel-y-Creuddyn, where he was known,
so he determined not to enter the village until after the people had
gone to their respective places of worship; he therefore sat down on
the hill side and contemplated the scene below.

"He saw the people leave their houses for the House of God, he heard
their songs of praise, and now he thinks he could venture to descend
and pass through the village unobserved. Luckily, no one saw him
going through the village, and now he has entered a barley field,
and although still uneasy in mind, he feels somewhat reassured, and
steps on quickly. He had not proceeded far in the barley field before
he found himself surrounded by a large number of small pigs. He was
not much struck by this, though he thought it strange that so many
pigs should be allowed to wander about on the Sabbath Day. The pigs,
however, came up to him, grunted and scampered away. Before he had
traversed the barley field he saw approaching him an innumerable number
of mice, and these, too, surrounded him, only, however, to stare at
him, and then disappear. By this Davies began to be frightened, and
he was almost sorry that he had broken the Sabbath Day by travelling
with his pack on his back instead of keeping the day holy. He was
not now very far from home, and this thought gave him courage and on
he went. He had not proceeded any great distance from the spot where
the mice had appeared when he saw a large grey-hound walking before
him on the pathway. He anxiously watched the dog, but suddenly it
vanished out of sight.

"By this, the poor man was thoroughly frightened, and many and truly
sincere were his regrets that he had broken the Sabbath; but on he
went. He passed through the village of Llanilar without any further
fright. He had now gone about three miles from Llanfihangel along the
road that goes to Aberystwyth, and he had begun to dispel the fear
that had seized him, but to his horror he saw something approach him
that made his hair stand on end. He could not at first make it out,
but he soon clearly saw that it was a horse that was madly dashing
towards him. He had only just time to step on to the ditch, when,
horrible to relate, a headless white horse rushed passed him.

"His limbs shook and the perspiration stood out like beads on bis
forehead. This terrible spectre he saw when close to Tan'rallt, but
he dared not turn into the house, as he was travelling on Sunday,
so on he went again, and heartily did he wish himself at home. In
fear and dread he proceeded on his journey towards Penrhiw. The most
direct way from Tan'rallt to Penrhiw was a pathway through the fields,
and Davies took this pathway, and now he was in sight of his home,
and he hastened towards the boundary fence between Tan'rallt and
Penrhiw. He knew that there was a gap in the hedge that he could get
through, and for this gap he aimed; he reached it, but further progress
was impossible, for in the gap was a lady lying at full length, and
immovable, and stopping up the gap entirely. Poor Davies was now more
terrified than ever. He sprang aside, he screamed and then fainted
right away. As soon as he recovered consciousness, he, on his knees,
and in a loud supplicating voice, prayed for pardon. His mother and
father-in-law heard him, and the mother knew the voice and said, "It
is my Will! some mishap has overtaken him." They went to him and found
he was so weak that he could not move, and they were obliged to carry
him home, where he recounted to them his marvellous experience. The
late Rector of Llangynog, who was intimately acquainted with William
Davies, had many conversations with him about his Sunday journey,
and he argued the matter with him, and tried to persuade him that he
had seen nothing, but that it was his imagination working on a nervous
temperament that had created all his fantasies. He, however, failed
to convince him, for Davies affirmed that it was no hallucination,
but that what he had seen that Sunday was a punishment for his having
broken the Fourth Commandment.

"Davies ever afterwards was a strict observer of the Sabbath."


