HOW TO GET RID OF GHOSTS, SPIRITS, GOBLINS, AND DEVILS, ETC.

In some parts, especially on the borders of Cardiganshire and
Carmarthenshire, it is believed that any one carrying a knife in his
hands, will never see or be troubled by a spirit, even when passing
a haunted spot in the depth of night.

When staying for a short time in the parish of Llandyssul about five
years ago, I was told that there lived a few years ago a certain man
in the village of Pontshan in that parish, who, when coming home late
one night, saw a ghost on the roadside whilst passing a well-known
haunted spot in the neighbourhood. The man took out his knife from
his pocket, and the ghost vanished. After this, whenever he passed
a haunted place the man held a knife in his hand, and never saw a
ghost again. In South Pembrokeshire, a V-shaped twig of the mountain
ash was considered a protective against spirits.

It was also believed once in all parts of Wales that to wear body-linen
inside out, and to nail a horseshoe against the door kept away both
evil spirits and witches. Even in the present day people all over the
world think that there is some "good luck" in finding a horseshoe,
and to a young girl it means a new lover.

When a spirit troubled a house in Wales, it was sometimes customary
to call together the most godly persons in the parish to hold a
prayer-meeting; at other times a conjurer, or a priest was sent for,
for it was formerly thought that a clergyman had the power to "lay"
or exorcise spirits. There were particular forms of exorcising. When
the Devil was in the belfry of Llanarth Church, Cardiganshire, the
Vicar went to drive away the Evil One, with "Bell, Book, and Candle."

Until the time of Henry VIII., it seems that it was customary to curse
mortals, as well as to exorcise fiends "with bell, book and candle";
for in an old book called "Dugdale's Baronage," published in 1675, it
is said that in the 37th. year of Henry III., "a Curse was denounced
in Westminster Hall against the violation of Magna Charta, with bell,
book and candle."

And in Fox's account of the ceremony of excommunication, we are told
that three candles were carried before the clergy, and that as each
candle was extinguished prayer was made that the souls of malefactors
and schismatics might be "given over utterly to the power of the
fiend as this candle is now quenched and put out."



YSPRYD PENPOMPREN PLAS OR A SPIRIT "LAID" IN A BOTTLE.

Penpompren Plas is a small mansion near Talybont in North
Cardiganshire. The late Mr. John Jones, Bristol House, informed me
that there was a spirit there once troubling the family, and the
servants, and especially the head servant who had no peace as the
ghost followed the poor man everywhere whenever he went out at night,
and often threw water into his face. At last the servant went to a
wise man or a conjurer. The Conjurer came with him to Penpompren Plas
to "lay" the Spirit, and transformed it into an insect, in a bottle,
which was securely corked. Then the bottle was thrown under the river
bridge close by.

There are many such stories in different parts of the country; and
it is said that under the Monument Arch of Old Haverfordwest Bridge
in Pembrokeshire, a spirit has been laid for a thousand years, and
that at the expiration of that time it will again be free to roam
the earth to trouble people.

About 60 years ago, a spirit which appeared in all forms, pig, mouse,
hare, etc., at Alltisaf, Llanfynydd, in Carmarthenshire, was "laid"
by the celebrated wizard, Harries, of Cwrtycadno. I was told of this
by two old men in the village of Llanfynydd about five years ago.


