A PRESENT DAY PHANTOM FUNERAL.

A young man who lives in the Gwaun Valley, between Pontfaen and
Fishguard informed me in the beginning of November, 1905, that he had
just seen a phantom or a spirit funeral only a few weeks previously.

A friend of his, a young porter at a Railway Station in the
neighbourhood of Cardiff, had come home ill to his native place in
Pembrokeshire, and his friend, my informant, one night sat up by his
bedside all night. About three o'clock in the morning the patient
was so seriously ill that my informant in alarm hurried to call
the father of the poor sufferer to come to see him, as the old man
lived in a small cottage close by. As soon as he went out through
the door into the open air, to his great astonishment he found
himself in a large crowd of people, and there was a coffin resting
on some chairs, ready to be placed on the bier; and the whole scene,
as it were, presented a funeral procession, ready to convey the dead
to the grave. When the young man attempted to proceed on his way,
the procession also proceeded, or moved on in the same direction,
so that he found himself still in the crowd. After going on in this
manner for about a hundred yards, he managed to draw one side from
the crowd and soon reached the house of his sick friend's father,
and nearly fainted. Three days after this vision the seer's friend
died; and on the day of the funeral the young man noticed that the
crowd stood in front of the house and the coffin resting on chairs
exactly as he had seen in the apparition. I may add that my informant
who had seen the phantom funeral was so terrified even at the time
when I saw him, that he was too much afraid to go out at night. It so
happened that I was staying in that part of Pembrokeshire at the time,
so I went to see the man myself, and a clergyman accompanied me.

I obtained the following account of a phantom funeral from the
Rev. John Phillips, Vicar of Llancynfelyn, North Cardiganshire. The
scene of the story was Cilcwm, Carmarthenshire:--


