A PHANTOM FUNERAL.

Though more than thirty years have run their course since the incident
which is to be described here occurred, still the impression which
it left on the writer's mind was so vivid and lasting that he finds
not the slightest difficulty in recalling its minutest details at
the present moment. Some experiences are so impressive that time
itself seems powerless to efface them from the memory, and of such
the following appears to be an instance:--

It happened in the early Spring, just when the days were perceptibly
lengthening, and a balmy feeling was creeping into the air, and a
glad sense of hope was throbbing throughout the whole of nature. A
boy of ten, or may be a couple of years younger, tired out after a
hard day of play and pleasure, sat resting on a log near a lonely
house, in a sparsely populated district. As he sat, he gazed down a
long stretch of white and dusty road leading away past the house. As
a rule, few and far between would be the travellers who used that
unfrequented road. The sole exception would be on a Sunday, when
perhaps a dozen or more of the neighbours might be seen wending their
way, to or from the nearest place of worship. Intense, therefore,
was the boy's surprise, when on this week-day, his eyes discerned a
goodly company turning the corner in the distance, and proceeding
in an orderly procession along the stretch of straight road which
his vantage ground commanded. He watched it keenly, and wondered
greatly. Never had he before seen such a crowd on that particular
road. As the people drew nearer and nearer, something of solemnity in
their orderly and silent manner struck on the watcher's imagination,
but no sense of anything akin to the supernatural obsessed his mind
for a second, still he failed not to mark, that for so large an
assemblage, it was remarkably noiseless. Twenty yards, more or less,
from where the youthful watcher sat, a footpath leading over a piece
of wet and barren land joined the road. This path, which could be
traversed only in dry weather, terminated half a mile away, at the
door of a solitary cottage inhabited by a farm hand named Williams,
who dwelt there with his wife and several young children. When the
crowd arrived at the spot where the path ran on to the road, there
seemed to be a momentary hesitation, and then the procession left the
road and took to the footpath. The watcher strained every nerve, in an
effort to recognise some one or other in the crowd, but though there
was something strangely familiar about it all, there was also something
so dim and shadowy, as to preclude the possibility of knowing anyone
with certainty; but as the tail end of the procession curved round
to gain the path, something he did observe, which caused a thrill,
for the last four men carried high on their shoulders a bier,--but it
was an empty bier. Soon as the multitude was out of sight, the boy
rushed to the house, and related his curious experience. No thought
of anything weird and uncanny had so far crossed his mind, and his one
desire at the time was to gain some information as to where the people
were bound for. Neither could he just then understand the manifest
consternation, and the hushed awe, which fell upon his hearers as he
unfolded his tale. Amongst these there happened to be a visitor, an
old dame of a class well known in many parts of rural Wales in those
days. It was her habit to stroll from farm to farm along the country
side, regaling the housewives with the latest gossip. In return she
would be sure of a meal, and also something to carry home in her
wallet. Naturally, such a character would be shrewd and keen, knowing
well not only what tales would suit her company, but also the truth,
or otherwise, of any tales which she herself might be a listener
to. In addition, the old dame in question was generally supposed to
be immune from all fear, and cared not how far from home she might
be when the shades of night overtook her. On the present occasion,
although a few minutes before, she had been on the point of starting,
and was indeed only waiting to be handed her usual dole of charity, no
sooner had she heard the lad's strange tale, than she flatly declared
that no power on earth could move her to travel an inch further that
evening, and so at the expense of much inconvenience to the household
a bed had to be prepared for her. However, she started early on the
following morning, and long before noon, owing mainly to her assiduous
diligence, the news had travelled far and near, that a phantom funeral
had been seen on the previous evening. Her tale made a deep impression
throughout the country-side. Those prone to superstition,--and it
must be confessed, they were many,--lent a ready ear. A few,--and
these prided themselves on their commonsense,--doubted. The latter
class were not slow to point out, what they considered to be, a
fatal flaw in the evidence. The supposed funeral was travelling
in a direction, which led away from the churchyard. Had it been
going down the road instead of up, they argued, that there might
be something in it. Then again, it took the footpath, and it was
pointed out, not only that funerals kept to the high roads, but that
this particular path, could not by any stretch of imagination be said
to lead to any burial ground. This seemed a reasonable view to take,
and as one day succeeded another, without anything unusual happening,
the excitement cooled down. However, within a few weeks Williams,
who lived in the cottage across the marsh was taken ill. At first,
it was thought that he had contracted a chill, and it was hoped that
he would soon be well again. The nearest medical man lived six miles
away, and that caused further delay. On the fifth day the doctor came,
but he came to find that it was too late for his skill to be of any
avail. A glance at the patient had satisfied him that it was a case
of double pneumonia, and that the end was rapidly approaching. A few
hours later and Williams had drawn his last breath. Three days more
and the funeral took place. As is the custom in country places, the
neighbours from far and near attended, and on their way a group of
men called at the burial place for the bier. This group was joined
by others so that long before the house of mourning was reached
the procession was a large one. It travelled up the long stretch
of road where the lad had watched that mysterious crowd, in the
twilight six weeks before. The same lad watched again, and when
the procession reached the point, where the footpath branched away
across the fields, the man who acted as leader stopped, and raised
his hand, while the procession hesitated for a moment, then looking
at his watch, the leader spoke in low clear tones, "men," said he,
"it is already getting late if we go round by the road, it will get
very late; we will take the path." He led the way and as his followers
swept round the curve, the lad saw that the last four men carried on
their shoulders an empty bier. It was being taken to fetch the body.



THE NEUADDLWYD "TOILI."

John Jones, Coed-y-Brenin, near Neuaddlwyd, was going home one evening
from Derwen-gam; and as he walked along he found himself suddenly
in a phantom funeral, and was so pressed by the crowd of spirits
that he nearly fainted. At last he managed to escape by turning
into a field. He then noticed that the phantom funeral proceeded
towards Neuaddlwyd, and soon there was a light to be seen in that
chapel through the windows. A few weeks after this a real funeral
took place. The above J. Jones, who had seen the apparition only
died about twelve years ago. My informant was Mr. Thomas Stephen,
near Mydroilyn, in the parish of Llanarth.



A HORSE SEEING A "TOILI" OR PHANTOM FUNERAL.

The following tale was related to me by Mr. Jones, Bristol House,
Talybont:--

A farmer's wife, who lived in the northern part of Cardiganshire,
had gone to Machynlleth Market one day riding a pony. On her journey
home that evening she met a "toili" on the road. The pony was the
first to notice the spirit-funeral, and the animal refused to go
forward, but turned back and stood trembling under the shelter of a
big tree till the "toili" had passed. The woman was quite terrified,
and as soon as she reached home she rushed into the house and asked
her husband to go out and put the pony in the stable, and stated that
she felt unwell that night. Soon after this, one of the family died.

Some persons have such clear vision of a phantom funeral, that they
are able even to recognise and give the names of the persons that
appear in the spectral procession.

Owen Shon Morris, of Pant'stoifan, Llanarth, who died 85 years ago,
saw a "toili" passing his own house in the direction of Llanarth,
at 1 o'clock in the morning. He even discovered that among the crowd
was his own friend, Evan Pugh, the tailor, and a woman wearing a red
petticoat. When the "toili" had gone as far as a certain green spot on
the road, after passing the house, the tailor and the woman with the
red petticoat left the procession, and returned to their homes. Twelve
months after this a funeral took place, and in the procession were
the tailor and the woman with a red petticoat, both of whom returned
home after accompanying the crowd as far as the green spot.

My informant was an old farmer, named Thomas Stephens, near Mydroilyn.


