DIVINATION BY THE TEA-CUP.

Tea-cup divination is also very much practised by young girls in
Wales in order to find out some future events concerning love affairs,
future husbands, etc. There was a woman, who only died a few years ago,
in the parish of Llandyssul, near a small village called Pontshan in
Cardiganshire, who was considered an expert in the art of fortune
telling by a tea cup, at least young women and young men thought
so, and many of them resorted to her, especially those who were in
love or intending to marry. There was another one near Llandovery
in Carmarthenshire, and there are a few even at present to whom the
maidens go for consultation.

But Welsh women, who are so fond of tea, can find out many things
themselves by means of the tea cup without resorting to those who are
considered experts in the art. When several of them meet together to
tea they help one another in divining their cups, and tea drinking
or sipping is the order of the day among the females of Wales. After
having emptied the cup, it is turned round three times in the left
hand, so that the tea-leaves may cover the surface of the whole
cup. Then the cup is placed in the saucer, bottom upwards, to drain,
for a few minutes before inspection. If the leaves are scattered evenly
round the sides of the cup, leaving the bottom perfectly clear, it is
considered a very good sign; but on the other hand when the bottom of
the cup appears very black with leaves, it is a very bad sign: some
trouble or some misfortune is near. When the leaves form a ring on the
side of the cup, it means that the girl who consults is to marry very
soon; but if the ring is at the bottom of the cup, disappointment
in love awaits her, or she is doomed to die single. When the tea
leaves form a cross or a coffin, that also is considered a bad sign;
but as a rule, a horse, a dog, or a bird portends good. Two leaves
seen in close proximity on the side of the cup foretell a letter
bringing good news. When there is a speck floating on the surface
of a cup of tea before drinking, some people say it means a letter,
a parcel, or a visitor, but a young girl takes it to represent her
lover, and she proves his faithfulness by placing the speck on the
back of her left hand, and striking it with the back of her right
hand. Should the speck or the small tea leaves stick to the back of
the left hand and cling or stick fast to the right hand when striking
it, it means that the young man is faithful; but on the other hand,
should it happen that the tea still remain on the left hand where
it was first placed, especially after striking it three times, the
young man is not to be depended upon. Some women can even tell by
means of the tea-cup what trade their admirer follows, the colour of
their future husband's hair, and many other such things.

A lily is considered a most lucky emblem, if it be at the top, or in
the middle of the cup, for this is considered a sign that the young
man, or the young woman who consults, will have a good and kind wife,
or husband, who will make him or her happy in the marriage estate,
but on the other hand, a lily at the bottom of the cup, portends
trouble, especially if clouded, or in the thick.

A heart, especially in the clear, is also a very good sign, for it
signifies joy and future happiness. Two hearts seen together in the
cup, the young man, or the young woman's wedding is about to take
place. Tea-cup divination is well-known all over the Kingdom; and in
the Colonies, especially Australia, it is by far more popular than
in England.


