A BIRD COMING INTO A HOUSE BEFORE A DEATH.

Mr. Rees, Maesymeillion, Llandyssul, informed me that many years ago
there lived in that part of the country an old woman known as Nell
Gwarnant. The old woman at one time had an only son, a young lad who
was very dear to her. One day a certain bird came into the house quite
suddenly, and descended on the rim of the Spinning Wheel, flapping its
wings. The old woman feared that the bird was a precursor of death,
and to her great sorrow her only son soon died. A bird coming into
the house is also a sign of a storm.

Birds as precursors of death seem to follow Welsh people to all
parts of the world. A few years ago a Corpse Bird appeared in Perth,
Western Australia, before the death of a Welsh lady in that city; and
this reminds me of a strange incident which happened in Patagonia,
30 years ago, when I was there. Two Welsh gentlemen, Mr. Powell,
who was known as "Helaeg," and Mr. Lewis Jones, a friend of the late
Sir Love Jones Parry, M.P., were returning to the Welsh Colony, from
Buenos Ayres, in a sailing vessel. When the ship came within a few
miles of the mouth of the river Chubut, the captain found it necessary
to remain in the open sea that day, as the tide was too low to enter
the river over the bar just then. Mr. Jones and Mr. Powell, however,
left in a small boat manned by Italian sailors; but when they were
within a certain distance of the land the sea was very rough, and a
certain bird appeared suddenly on the scene. Mr. Powell pointed out
the bird to his friend and said, "Do you see that bird, that's the
Bird of Biam! We shall be drowned this very moment." Just as he spoke,
the boat suddenly turned over, and the unfortunate speaker got drowned
on the spot. The other men were saved. Mr. Powell, who, unfortunately,
got drowned, was a gifted Welsh Roman Catholic gentleman, who knew
about twelve languages, and was a friend of the President of the
Argentine Republic.

It was reported in the "Aberystwyth Observer" twenty-two years ago,
that before the death of Mrs. Fryer, Lady Pryse (now Dowager), noticed
a bird hovering around Gogerddan, and at times flapping his wings at
the windows.


